Reading: A POST-NEOLIBERAL ECOPOLITICS? DELEUZE, GUATTARI, AND ZAPATISMO

Author: Thomas Nail

Units: 0.4, Zone:theory

Bibliography:Nail, Thomas. 2010. A POST-NEOLIBERAL ECOPOLITICS? DELEUZE, GUATTARI, AND ZAPATISMO. Philosophy Today 54 (2):179-190.

Links:Nail, Thomas. 2010. A POST-NEOLIBERAL ECOPOLITICS? DELEUZE, GUATTARI, AND ZAPATISMO. Philosophy Today 54 (2):179-190.


Notes:

Observations: I am proposing that the live coding communities should be understood as an ecology. I am also proposing to understand different conceptions of time as ecological. The relationship between ecology, D&G theory and Zapatismo seems relevant,

Summary:

I argue that the theoretical practice of “machinic ecol-
ogy” developed by Deleuze and Guattari of-
fers a new theory of ecopolitical conditions, el-
ements, and agencies that is neither
representational nor purely critical, but philo-
sophically constructive. And politically, I ar-
gue the Zapatista’s practices of autonomy,
community management, and third person
agency offer an exemplary direction for a post-
neoliberal environmentalism that is based nei-
ther on nation-state, capitalism, individualism,
nor on reactionary demonstrations, but on eco-
logical self-management and federated auton-
omy. Accordingly, this essay will be divided
into two sections. The first outlines and de-
fends Deleuze and Guattari’s definition of a
non-dualistic machinic ecology. The second
then argues for this theory and its main con-
cepts as a coherent alternative to both norma-
tive and purely critical environmentalisms by
showing its conceptual illumination of and by
the post-neoliberal ecopolitical practices of
the Zapatistas in their defense of the Lacandon
Jungle.

The late twentieth century has signaled a triple
defeat for liberatory politics: the retreat and
economic co-optation of feminist, environ-
mental, racial, and labor struggles of the 1960s
and 70s in the First World; the disintegration of
Soviet-style Socialism in the industrial Second
World; and the decline of colonial liberation
movements in the Third World.

While much of environ-
mental scholarship on Deleuze and Guattari
has aimed at affirming a machinic ecology of
multiplicities, each connecting to the other in a
cosmic web of non-dualistic interconnection
(the “Earth” or “Mechanosphere”), I have pro-
posed instead that their most significant con-
tribution to ecopolitics is rather their machinic
eco-logic composed of three different types of
machines: the abstract machine, the concrete
machinic assemblage, and the machinic per-
sona. These three structural elements work
through a process of expression and affection
demonstrated in the three practices of
Zapatista forest management: autonomy, com-
munity management, and third person agency.

Zapatistas have had to invent a new
kind of ecological politics. By directly taking
control over their local forests and resources
and defending them democratically, they are
proposing a new ecopolitical strategy irreduc-
ible to the present neo-liberal conjuncture.
	
	
