Reading: Art and Telematics: Towards a Network Consciousness (1984)

Author: Roy Ascott

Units: 0.53333333333333, Zone:network music

Bibliography:Ascott, Roy. 2003.Art and Telematics: Towards a Network Consciousness (1984)Chapter 11 in Telematic Embrace: Visionary Theories of Art, Technology, and Consciousness. (Ed.) Edward A. Shanken. Berkeley, CA:University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-21803-1 pp. 185-200

Links:https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/lmj.2009.19.103c


Notes:

Anticipated networks when "I was visited witha cybernetic vision of art after reading the works of Norbert Wienerand Ross Ashby"

"some link between the computer andthe means of communication was (in my experience) lacking"

a link between cybernetics and communication has to be explored.

"Networking invites personal disclosure." Does it really????


 first international networking project == anglosphere people moving around with their terminals.

First planetary throw of iching.

Amazing to observe how addictive networking is from the old days even:
"“Guess I’m hooked because I just got up and the first thing Idid (after brushing my teeth) was to log in.”"

jajaja hard to understand how a connection mediated by digital media can be meaningfull. The question is the same but the context has changed.

"One reason may bethat networking puts you, in a sense, out of body, linking your mind into a kindof timeless sea."

"Networking produces an interweaving of imaginations that gives the term “associative think-ing” the most amplified interpretation."

Networking is like weaving.

"The telephone was based onsimple knowledge of electric currents. Radio and television use electromagneticwaves. ( Networking is) a medium that fully utilises the logical and memory abil-ities of the modern computer.... The long term consequences are incalcula-ble”"

Loosing a sense of space and time.*******

"“computerized conferencing” (USA), “computer-mediatedinteraction” (Canada), and “teleconferencing” [ Hiltz and Turoª 1978]. AnthonyOettinger  has  advanced  the  neologism  “compunications”  [Oettinger  et  al.1977]. I prefer to use the terms “networking,” for the activity, and “telematics,”for the medium as a whole."


Particiátion and interconnectedness** lol


Telematic networking of text. ideas like distributed autorship made sense back then.

Dispersed authorship!!

" Telematic  text  by  contrast,rather  than  aªording  a jouissance solitaire,oªers  the  means  of  a  “coming  to-gether.” It is a distributed but not dissipated jouissance; metaphysically strange(at first) since the act is indiªerent to the geographical location of its contrib-utors, as it is to the time or sequence of their interventions."

Telematic mode is to play and embrace uncertainty!!!*****

**: “This shouldnot be very surprising, for psychoanalysis has already shown us that speech isnot merely the medium that manifests— or dissembles—desires; it is also theobject of desire.”**

Foucault on desire and speech.


The network can be observed from the lense of will power from Nietzche, thus from the voluptas and desiring machines / BwO of D&G.

"Telematics does not only generate a new order of art discourse but demandsa new form of criticism and analysis. The theory of this mode of art will haveits technical, philosophical, and communications aspect bound up within a largercybernetic  framework, "

New relationship with the arts.


Duchamp's great glass is a perspective that networks use conviniently.

Pollock's metaphysics becomes the technology of netwokrs.

Dichotomy emiter/reciever  // artist/audience is put into question.

Talks about horizontality!

Such incredible naivite on networks: "it may even augur the nextrevolutionary  step  in  developing  human  consciousness. "

"Networking is a shared activity of mind and a form of behaviour that is botha dance and an embrace. It brings about a convergence of ideas from scatteredsources, which, then, amplified, platted or stacked, diverge out into branchingpathways of meaning."

"It breaks the boundaries not only of the insular individual butof institutions, territories, and time zones. To engage in telematic communica-tion is to be at once everywhere and nowhere. In this, it is subversive. It sub-verts the idea of authorship bound up within the solitary individual. "

Subverts the idea of the individual.




