Reading: Breathing: Chaos and Poetry

Author: Franco Berardi

Units: 2, Zone:theory

Bibliography:Berardi, Franco 'Bifo'. Breathing: Chaos and Poetry. Semiotext(e). 2019.

Links:https://books.google.ca/books?id=22ottQEACAAJ&pg=PA69&hl=es&source=gbs_toc_r&cad=2#v=onepage&q&f=false


Notes:


I cant breath a schyzoanalysis, an interview with Mitra Azar:

This idea of knowledge as inspiration of the world
is much more interesting than the Hegelian idea of the conscious and rational domination
of the world. We are not dominating the world, we are small organisms pulsating to the
rhythm of the cosmos, and our activity is first of all inspiration.

Social movements are an exercise in conspiration, in translating singular
breathing into a collective breathing.

In his last book, Guattari speaks of a chaosmic spasm. What is a spasm? A spasm
is a condition of hypermobilization of the body, precisely of a muscle, of the lungs, if you
want. A respiratory spasm is a condition in which you cannot breathe because your body
is too contracted, and this is making breathing impossible. Nevertheless, Guattari says the
spasm can become chaosmic, and this happens when the spasm searches for a new
syntony, a new attunement with the surrounding universe. The body enters in a phase of
spasmic vibrational oscillation up to the point in which this oscillation calms down and
enters a phase of syntony, of sympathy, which is the ability to feel for other bodies, to
share the same pathos. The old idea of revolution can be very well replaced by the idea of
the chaosmic spasm. The spasm is the act of violence that you are obliged to enact in order
to recompose the harmony of your spasmic body. Chaosmosis is the ability to find a new
osmosis, a new equilibrium, a new harmony beyond a condition of spasm.

The concept of spasm seems crucial for understanding the current contraction.
Movements have been trying to deal with the spasm, and to find a new rhythm. Finding a
new rhythm is also about finding a new interval, it is not only the immediate reaction to
repression – which is also, and inevitably, spasmic. Finding a new rhythm is also about
articulating the moment of pause from the spasmic reaction, the moment in which people
build intimacy, eroticism.

This is the first time that humankind perceives the future as hell. Maybe, the
apocalyptic imagination of the Middle Ages imagined something like that, maybe
Hieronymus Bosch did it, with the euphoria of Bowie. Nevertheless, now it is not anymore
about an apocalyptic imagination, but about a concrete apocalyptic prospect. Extinction
is the only realistic prospect of the planet, of the human planet, and this stays in the realm
of the unthinkable. I’ve heard about the movement Extinction Rebellion, about this idea
that we must rebel against extinction. I understand the point, of course, but I don’t agree.
We should not rebel against extinction, we should instead learn to breathe at the rhythm
of extinction. How? Don’t panic, breathe normally, stop thinking that you need to breathe
more, stop thinking that you need to live more, you have been living enough. Take it easy.

The point is: how can we learn to share
breathing in the perception of breathlessness. How can we share the experience of
breathing together when we have announced that the end is coming? How can we learn
to come out from the plastic financial automaton, to withdraw from the need to consume?
How can we reduce our consumption of air and of things up to the point that it gives us
the possibility of starting again? Where is the point of starting again?

Fascism is a mandatory synchronization of automated breathing, it is when you
can no more breathe according to your singular rhythm, when you have lost the relation
with your singularity and you need to inhale through the respiratory machines – which is
the financial machine, which is the plastic machine, which is the salary machine.

The general intellect is the hopeful place, but the general intellect is not breathing now, or
it is breathing through an iron lung, in a connective, automatized way. The general
intellect has lost its respiratory body at the moment, and it has turned into a collective
machine unable to conjoin. You know, the network, the digital network, this is the
respiratory machine of the general intellect, and as long as the general intellect will be
obliged to breathe in a connective way, this breathing will not be happy, will not be
creative, will not be a laboratory, will not be erotic. The liberatory imagination of the
future that I can have, sometimes, is based on reactivating the erotic body of the general
intellect. Movements have always been the activation of an erotic body enabling the brain
to imagine things that did not exist yet.



