Reading: Capitalism and Fascism of Everyday Life - Resistance, Revolution and Fascism: Zapatismo and Assemblage Politics

Author: Anthony Faramelli

Units: 0.66666666666667, Zone:theory

Bibliography:Faramelli, A. 2018. Capitalism and the Fascism of Everyday Life. In Resistance, Revolution and Fascism: Zapatismo and Assemblage Politics. London: Bloomsbury Academic. pp. 15-34

Links: http://dx.doi.org/10.5040/9781350050099.ch-001


Notes:


Observations: 
The book I am proposing here is a good way of anchoring my two most relevant theorethical fields (decolonial theory and assemblage theory), articulating them together and emphasising temporality as a key concept to reflect the politics that I favour. Anti-fascism, anti-capitalism, critical positions vis-a-vis revolutionary thinking, critical time studies and (conceptual & social) networks are explored.

The book does not provide an obvious link with sound, aesthetics and technology. Faramelli wrote a paper/article/book on 'Digital Resistance' that could make up for the lack of relfections on technology. The author suggested me to look at Eleni Ikoniadou as a link to sound art and Henri Lefebvre as a link to poly-temporality and rhythm. 



Abstract:

This book is an in depth analysis of the intrinsic, but under-theorized,
relationship between revolution and fascism and an outlined proposal of a
politics of resistance to these forms domination. Through an examination of
the psychic conditions created by integrated world capitalism as well as by the
revolutionary projects that oppose this form of financial and social
organization, this book identifies the limits of revolutionary thinking. In doing
so it argues that revolutionary projects are inevitably subsumed by
capitalism’s organization of life, causing them to reproduce the same
structures of control.
Following its analysis of revolution and fascism, this book will suggest a way
out of our current political stasis. It will do this through the development of a
philosophically informed practice of resistance termed assemblage politics.
Drawing on the resistant philosophies developed by Deleuze and Guattari and
the zapatista insurgents, the form of resistance proposed is marked by a
structural fluidity that allows it to avoid being captured by capitalism’s
repressive structures.
To readers interested in the developing field of resistance studies, this book
will build on Howard Caygill’s seminal work, On Resistance. It will enable
readers to have a better understanding of the current social-political
landscape and provide a fuller context of the political necessity to move away
from notions of revolution. Through its construction of a specific practice of
resistance, this book will give readers a more contemporary and practical
understanding of Caygill’s defiant philosophy.

Three chapters of interest:


1) Revolution and Fascism: Deleuze and Guattari argue that deregulated
capitalism is the most powerful force the world had ever encountered in terms
of it’s ability to “deterritorialized” or break down established systems and
reinvent new ones. Neo-liberal capitalism is the ultimate
form of revolution and other, oppositional, revolutions utilising the same
fundamental temporal and bio-political structures can only reproduce the
same authoritarian structures, allowing it to be subsumed by the capitalist
revolution. 

2) Resistance: Zapatismo and Assemblage Politics: This chapter is an examination of the theoretical components of zapatismo, with a strong focus on the multiple points of convergence it has with Deleuze and Guattari’s active philosophy of resistance. This chapter will argue that the strength of zapatismo comes from a form of organization termed “assemblage politics.”

3) Resistance to the Future: This chapter will look at the analytic, or diagnostic, mechanism active in
zapatismo’s assemblage politics, grounding its analysis in the zapatista
resistance to linear time. Arguing against revolution’s linear notions of timethat see change following a singular trajectory, it will propose a “resistant
time” which is understood as a topological plane that is folded over onto itself
so that different events come into contact with each other. Thf time will be grounded in the zapatista writings on time. It will demonstrate how zapatismo constructs a temporality where they are put into direct communication with their ancestors, their “principles” (narrated as
“the first gods”) and the zapatistas who are yet to be born. Zapatismo uses
the communication enabled by this topological understanding of time as a
diagnostic mechanism to locate and resist their repressive fascistic drives.
