Reading: Coding Publics

Author: Geoff Cox and Alex McLean

Units: 0.96666666666667, Zone:live coding

Bibliography:Geoff Cox and Alex McLean. 2012. 'oding Publics'. Chapter 3 in Speaking Code: Coding as Aesthetic and Political Expression. The MIT Press. pp. 69-98

Links:http://from.esad-gv.fr/designgraphique/_archives_etudiants/DNSEP_2016/Clarisse_Podesta/(Geoff%20Cox+Alex%20McLean)%20Speaking%20Code.pdf


Notes:


Notes were lost by a computer crash.

So,

The author draws a lot from the idea of the public by Hannah Arendt. Therte is an introductory context: the arab spring, the occupy wall street movement and wikileaks.


First lets loose the idea that the internet is intrinsically emancipatory and non-hierarchical.

"Here lies a crucial point, that despite all attempts to capture
our voices in simulations and telephonic extensions, the issue of excess confirms how
voices remain resistant to their encapsulation as they oscillate between private and
public domains."


"He is warning against the dangers of what Arendt identified as “ publicness without a public
sphere, ” which seems to have become so painfully prevalent under current condi-
tions. 19 What seems to be lacking in discussions of the public domain is a deeper way
into the concept of the public itself"

The code has been hidden (taken to the private sphere), number one example is Apple:

"This sense of purification is exemplified by the Apple paradigm of software development with
specially conceived proprietary “ apps ” (for iPhones and iPads) that close off users from
the underlying impurities ( “ stink ” ) of code, through the clean interface of the App
Store and iTunes for instance. These current developments are crucial for a fuller
understanding of the suppression of political expression in the public realm, and the
ways in which public intellect is becoming ever more privatized (the example from
the previous chapter, of the rejection of iCapitalism , is a case in point)."


Valorisation: workers are alienated from their work, in a similar way the owners of workers time treat workers as tools.

"Speech theory reminds us that meanings of words are not derived merely from their
logical structure but from their public usage (just as Laporte clarifies, in quoting
Barthes, that it is not the word shit that smells). 35 There can be no such thing as a
private language."

So why should code be private?


-- Ownership

Distinction between propietary and free software.

Free software is owned collectivelly propietary software is commodified and owned privately (its ownership is individualised).

"As collective speech acts, the songs are generated by collective voices, and, in keeping with oral
traditions, the voice remains somewhat resistant to its commodification. In the case of songs, the process of production is privileged over product."



GNU/Linux is a good example for this.

-- Freedoms

"Crucial to an understanding of this ideological aspect is that the antonym
of open is not “ closed ” in this case but “ proprietary, ” as Kelty points out, demonstrat-
ing its significance to ownership regimes and the expanding global marketplace."


So, software can be developed as open-source but this does not mean that it will obvey the freedoms of free softawre, open source is a technique, or a process that can be for profit or for community formation. Open source development is not social or political.

Free software is political as it relies in a legal framwork that does not allow the commodification and capture of the software developed under such ideas.


-- something about networks

-- Exits:

There are many artists trying to avoid capture from the valorisation of the web 2.0-

Suicidie 2.0 allows users to get rid of the energy and time cosnuming "social media platforms"


This paragraph:
"In Democracy and Other Neoliberal Fantasies , Jodi Dean explains this in terms of the
construction of willing subjectivities: “ Communicative capitalism captures our politi-
cal interventions, formatting them as contributions to its circuits of affect and
entertainment — we feel political, involved, like contributors who really matter . ” 103 This
leads her to conclude that participatory democracy is not the answer to contemporary
political problems but a symptom . Active participation remains a fantasy in her terms,
like clicking a button on an online petition for instance. This is something that Les
Liens Invisibles have taken quite literally in another project, their online petition
platform Repetitionr (2010)."

"As can be understood from these examples, the human subject is no longer defined
as an active citizen but as a consumer, reacting to the rationality of the market rather
than the limits of government."

So, the difference between liberalism and neoliberalism is that the state no longer regulates society, inluding the market. But it is actually the market the grand regulator and it has to convince its citizens to participate actively in their own suppression.

"The current attacks on public welfare
services as part of so-called austerity measures seem to press the point of producing
alternatives, as public education and the welfare system are eroded by the reductive
logic of financial capitalism. The problem is to identify when speech acts are ventrilo-
quized ones."

-- Public for itself

"Yet it does not really seem to be the case that certain voices are
suppressed or silenced, but that they are emptied of significant meanings. Voices
are ever more present but cleansed and purified, and even dismembered from
the body."


-- Recombination

Privatizing tech clearly pushes for a distancing between affect and speech "in a situation where actions and words have lost their point".

"To Berardi, the fundamental struggle remains between machines for liberating desire and
mechanisms of control over the imaginary, and clearly this can be applied to speech
and coding cultures."

Berardi suggests "dynamic recombinations":
- refusal of work
- The invention of temporary autonomous zones
- free software initiatives


"In its rejection of proprietary code, the
free software movement can be understood as an example of emergent and self-
organizing public action, what Kelty identifies as a “ recursive public, ” 118 extending
Arendt ’ s definition of a public through speech and action to incorporate technical and
legal infrastructures. Thus publicness is constituted not simply by speaking, writing,
arguing, and protesting but also through modification of the domain or platform
through which these practices are enacted, making both technology and the law
unstable."

Free software is a special kind of speech act that can modify its own infrastructure...

"But if speaking, acting, and running code have become somewhat incorporated into the
mechanisms of domination, especially in the case of service-based platforms where
there is no code left to share, then the publics associated with coding need to resist
market logic with a broader set of political alliances. Furthermore, the pluralities of
voices and actions can only be effective if this paradoxical sense of totality is under-
stood, for this is where politics resides."

So, about the individual/collective divide:

There is an underlying paradox of the homogeneous collective that speaks as an individual in the name of the individuals.

"In this way they
become collective individuals, a paradoxical formulation that comes close to Arendt ’ s
description of a plurality of unique individuals. Yet the myth of equality continues to
underwrite the logic of liberal democracies, with the idea that somehow the diversity
of our voices can be accounted for through the ventriloquism of the representational
process where individual voices are homogenized as one. This is how Spinoza addresses
the paradox: “ The collective is an ‘ individual of individuals ’ with a body and a soul
(the body politic). ”"

"Berardi adopts from Spinoza too, represents the way that the collective-individual operates through imagination
and reason, both through desire and effective rule."

"The market seemingly allows for diverse con-
sumer choices and rights, in exchange for a strengthening of its own power and
expanding consumption of technological devices that purport to allow for freedom
of expression. In other words, the voices that the system allows strengthen the force
of the market and its very hold over the voice."


-- Autonomy

------ So, how to resist the privatization of the digital networks???

1. Deeper engagement with the concept of voice.

2. "To reject the amplified voice of authority and refuse its
command is to refuse the economization of language and expression."

"but inherently paradoxical, and this confusion continues to the
present day with code too. Evidently, “ no one who speaks under the condition of
freedom of opinion knows what he actually means. Although most people believe that
their ideas contradict other ideas, and are polemically directed against other ideas,
these ideas in fact contradict only themselves. Every speaker says what he intends to
mean, but he also says the opposite of this. All opinions that circulate in the free
market of ideas are characterized equally by this state of internal contradiction, inter-
nal paradox. ”"

About recursive publics:

"In other words, the public
knows it is incomplete, and its lack of totality informs the ways in which it can rein-
vent itself as a body politic, and eventually become a public for-itself."


"The public function of the intellect is crucial here, and this leads Berardi to trace
Hegel ’ s move from in-itself to for-itself further, via Marx ’ s adaptation, to the concept
of “ mass intellectuality. ”"

Intellect is not a public force until it is recognised as political.

"According to Berardi, only the autonomy of intellectual
labor from economic rule can save us from the forces of capitalism, and he is invoking
collective and networked intelligence. The speculation in the present book is that
coding practices offer a means to recombine speech, action, and intellect in this way."









































































































































