Reading: Composing

Author: Jacques Attali

Units: 0.53333333333333, Zone:sound studies

Bibliography:Attali, Jaques. 1985.ComposingChapter 5in Noise: The Political Economy of Music. University of Minnesota Press pp. 133-148

Links:https://monoskop.org/images/6/67/Attali_Jacques_Noise_The_Political_Economy_of_Music.pdf


Notes:


There is a fundamental noise and it is possible to understand what follows if we pay attention tlo this noise.

"Today, a new music is on the rise, one that can neither be expressed
nor understood using the old tools, a music produced elsewhere and otherwise."

Change in the way people listen.

NOT A NEW MUSIC. But a new way for making music.

It is not a return to the old ways of ritualising music but a communication project for music.

"No. It is the advent of a radically new form of the insertion of music into communication, one that
is overturning all of the concepts of political economy and giving new meaning
to the political project."


Create meaning (codes) and share them with others == Compose!

"Inventing new codes, inventing the message at the same time as the language."

Pleasure of being instead of having.

"Alienation is not born of production and exchange, nor of property, but of
usage" 
^ This suggests that the superstructure precedes the base somehow.

"Exteriority can only disappear in composition, in which the musician plays
primarily for himself, outside any operationality, spectacle, or accumulation of
value; when music, extricating itself from the codes of sacrifice, representation,
and repetition, emerges as an activity that is an end in itself, that creates its own
code at the same time as the work."

The art for the art's sake? I would prefer not to...

Composition:

A negation of the division of roles

To listen to musi9c is to rewrite it

The listener is the operator

erase the limits between worker and consumer

"to compose is to take pleasure in the instru-
ments, the tools of communication, in use-time and exchange-time as lived and
no longer as stockpiled."

"Music is a foretoken of evolution on the basis of behavior in the human
world, in a crisis announced by artists' refusal to be standardized by money."

-- The fracture

Death of the specialist...

-- The new noise

So basically the music creation activity should be generalised. Everybody should create music ... any creatro that encourages that is interesting to analyse from this perspective.

"A music produced by each individual for himself, for plea-
sure outside of meaning, usage and exchange."

-- The feilure of the economy of free music

"Free jazz was the first attempt to express in economic terms the refusal of
the cultural alienation inherent in repetition, to use music to build a new culture."


New music outside the industry.

Here the author offers a great example of an attempt (by free jazz black musicians) to produce music outside the industry.

Repetition == control on distribution over the production of demand and not the production of the commodity

Capitulation:

"The black people of America have adopted a more "reflective" polit-
ical position, with everything that word implies . . . . It's unwise to
take needless risks, to make yourself obvious, to mouth off on televi-
sion. That makes us vulnerable on every level, easily identified by
reactionary forces."


"It also shows how the refusal to go along with the crisis of proliferation
created locally the conditions for a different model of musical production, a new
music."


This is interesting: locally there are conditions for other forms of music to happen. The question is how to put in communication all the local musics outside the realm of repetition?


***
""True creativity
lies with the foreigners, and culture is on the side of those who live on the mar-
gins of culture without living with it . . . the metics" (0. Revault d' Allones).
Their music is generally without cultural references."
^^ this is just weird and 'plainly unaware of how "the amrgins" work


Proliferation of new musical practices (not new forms of music) "irreducible to representation (to ex-
change) or to repetition (to stockpiling)"


"It heralds the negation of the tool-
oriented usage of things. By subverting objects, it heralds a new form of the col-
lective imaginary, a reconciliation between work and play."


"Should we read this
emergence as the herald of a liberation from exchange-value, or only of the
emplacement of a new trap for music and its consumers, that of automanipula-
tion? The answer to these questions, I think, depends on the radicality of the ex-
periment."


But the trap remains in the tool. Compose with predefined tools will always lead to already known results. This is related with what we are proposing.

"A structuring of desire and production can then be outlined on the basis of what music makes audible
of them."

"In composition, to produce is first of all to take pleasure in the production
of differences. Musicians foresaw this new concept. For example, in the lan-
guage of jazz, to improvise is "to freak freely." A freak is also a monster, a
marginal. To improvise, to compose, is thus related to the idea of the assumption
of differences, of the rediscovery and blossoming of the body. "Something that
lets me find my own rhythm between the measures""


****In composition, to produce is first of all to take pleasure in the production
of differences.****


Ideas around death and life: "To compose is simultaneously to commit a murder and
to perform a sacrifice. It is to become both the sacrificer and the victim, to make
an ever-possible suicide the only possible form of death and the production of
life."

Death is part of being alive.


Liberation in ones present own enjoyment.


Relationship *** composition does not deny communication it changes its rules.

"In composition, therefore, music emerges as a relation to the body
and as transcendence."


"But in composition, it is no longer, as in representation, a question of mark-
ing the body; nor is it a question of producing it, as in repetition. It is a question
of taking pleasure in it."

"Any noise, when two people decide to invest their imaginary and their
desire in it, becomes a potential relationship, future order."


--The Technology of Composition !!!!!!!

Representation -> printing
repetition -> recording

composition -> instrument!!  (so we are talking about the invention of new instruments!!)



Recording tool will transform into the basis for the tools of composition


*** The Political Economy of Composition ****

composition == production <-> consumption

("a substitute for the stockpiling of labor that
simulates sacrifice")

"Production is not foreseable before its conclusion"

Time collapses into lived time instead of fragmenting into exhcange time and usetime

"The wager of the economy of composition, then, is that social coherence is possible when each person assumes
violence and the imaginary individually, through the pleasure of doing."

"Composition liberates time so that it can be lived, not stockpiled. It is thus
measured by the magnitude of the time lived by men, which takes the place time
stockpiled in commodities."


So time is measured by the experience that people have on any given time.

So prolbems arise from this model the first is the fundamental problem of polytemporality (how can two autonomous lived times can co-habit a same space or compensate eaxch other rather than itnerrupt?)

So two concepts come into mind for the author: Tolerance and autonomy.

Boulez talks about how improvisation is impossible: public (collective) onanism.

"There is only one way: recovering-in the units of produc-
tion and of life, in undertakings and collectivities-some meaning for things."

"But the dangers are immense, for once the repetitive world is left behind, we
enter a realm of fantastic insecurity."

Time is now in a laberynth of time (lol)

"In composition, it is cartography, local knowledge, the insertion of culture into production and a general availability of
new tools and instruments"

"Composition thus leads to a staggering conception of history, a history that
is open, unstable, in which labor no longer advances accumulation, in which the
object is no longer a stockpiling of lack, in which music effects a reappropriation
of time and space. Time no longer flows in a linear fashion; sometimes it crystal-
lizes in stable codes in which everyone's composition is compatible, sometimes
in a multifaceted time in which rhythms, styles, and codes diverge, interdepen-
dencies become more burdensome, and rules dissolve."

"Living in the void means admitting the constant presence of the potential for
revolution, music .and death: "What can a poor boy do, except play for a rock
'n' roll band?" ("Street Fighting Man," Rolling Stones). Truly revolutionary
music is not music which expresses the revolution in words, but which speaks
of it as a lack."



































































































