Reading: Concerning Nets and Spurs: Meaning, Mind, and Telematic Difusion (1985)

Author: Roy Ascott

Units: 0.36666666666667, Zone:network music

Bibliography:Ascott, Roy. 2003.Concerning Nets and Spurs: Meaning, Mind, and Telematic Difusion (1985)Chapter 12 in Telematic Embrace: Visionary Theories of Art, Technology, and Consciousness. (Ed.) Edward A. Shanken. Berkeley, CA:University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-21803-1 pp. 201-211

Links:https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/lmj.2009.19.103c


Notes:

Meaning of telematic difusion.

Weaving of networks == creation of the universe

Spurs hooks to unravel meaning.

"“science,” “art,” “philosophy,” and “technology,” so as to more thoroughly ar-ticulate and advance our desires for a more holistic relationship between our-selves and the universe."

Telematics the convergence between telecommunications and computers.

"Telematic process involves ambiguity, uncertainty, and incompleteness; mean-ing is not given but negotiated, endlessly reconstituted and redefined; truth,always relative, does not lie in an absolute location but is embedded in process,is telematically inscribed in the networking that is human behaviour at its mostliberated."

Complex system call for transdisciplinarity.

The immateriality of the network is bound to the ideas of francois lyotard. meh

"We have come to the endof the usefulness of language derived from the Enlightenment, with which mod-ernism was continuous."

So postmodern thinking all the way. Cyber hippie orientalism included.

Duchamp understood that the workd of art does not reside in an object but in a system.

No senders and recievers only users. lol

"multidimensional space in which a variety of writings, none ofthem original, blend and clash. The text is a tissue of quotations drawn frominnumerable centres of culture”"  like estuary

"The dance of data and free play of sense are attributes that telematic processcan only amplif y. "

"But the creative potential of telematic networks will  only  be  realised  to  the  extent  that  artists  resist  the  monopolisation  andcolonisation of electronic space by multinational business and the military"



















