Reading: Conclusion book: Feminism, Time, and Nonlinear History. Breaking Feminist Waves

Author: Victoria Browne

Units: 0.13333333333333, Zone:time studies

Bibliography:Browne, Victoria. 2014.ConclusionChapter Conclusion in Feminism, Time, and Nonlinear History. Breaking Feminist Waves. Palgrave Macmillan, New York pp. 143-146

Links:https://www.dukeupress.edu/in-the-meantime


Notes:

"Historical time, I have argued, is operated through the practice of
tracing the past, configuring historical narratives, mapping timelines,
and constructing generational affiliations. These historical practices
allow us to connect diffuse presents, pasts, and futures, and thus
enable concepts and cultures of historical time to come into being.
They are ways of both “making” time, and “reckoning” with time."

I have sought
to demonstrate that the temporalities of feminist traces, narratives,
timelines, and generations are irreducible to one temporal order, or
one mode of temporal relations.

The coexisance of timelines and temporal conceptions is never pure, or does not exist in a vacuum but is always in the midst of power relatiosnhips. Articulating plural and heterogeneous conceptions of time will always be a political act.

“If the ‘our’ is to have any meaning in the normative judg-
ment of ‘our times’ in the world-political present, then explanation
and normative judgment of ‘our times’ has to become sensitive to a
multiplicity of times and temporalities.

If there would be a main narrative of what history is:
"As the mainstream’s “need to translate” is so often based on a desire
to simplify unfamiliar ideas, arguments, and histories into short-
hands and summaries, the result is often (quoting Spivak) “uncar-
ing translations that transcode in the interest of dominant feminist
knowledge” (ibid.; Spivak 2009, 96)"

inhibit the "desire to simplify unfamiliar ideas" *******

Assymetrical ignorance. <- interesting

Practice an ethics of encounter!!

Does not seek to assimilate and contain but does not make communication impossible!

On this model, he explains, codes are switched without going through a universal logic
or set of rules, and there is no overarching, empty “historical time”
that remains unaffected by the temporal practices and configurations
it supposedly contains” (Chakrabarty 2000, 86)

Codes switch without having to go over a universal logic! There is no overarching or universal time.

"reducing heterogeneous historical tem-
poralities to a predetermined order of “waves” or “phases,” which
presumes to speak for an “already given whole” (ibid., 107)"

"the imagination “has to suffer from the experience of traveling across temporalities,”"

Polytemporality is related with coalition models of politics.

To join forces as “feminists” is to name a shared set of problems and
desire for change;

^^^ polytemporality allows you to acknowledge other people's rhythms and timelines with the possibility that from the combined temporalities a set of rhyhtms and trajectories of revolutionary change might emerge. 


A set of temporalities which have in common a political project.

“temporality of struggle,” which challenges the logics of linear-
ity, development, and progress, and the “law of identical temporal-
ity.” Rather than a search for origins and endings, a temporality of
struggle implies an “insistent, simultaneous, non-synchronous pro-
cess characterized by multiple locations, rather than a search for ori-
gins and endings”

The temporality of struggle allows one to go beyond oneself. To think of relationships beyond the personal struggle. In this way articulating together various struggles.



















































