Reading: Double Coding

Author: Geoff Cox and Alex McLean

Units: 0.53333333333333, Zone:live coding

Bibliography:Geoff Cox and Alex McLean. 2012. 'Double Coding'. Chapter 0 in Speaking Code: Coding as Aesthetic and Political Expression. The MIT Press.

Links:http://from.esad-gv.fr/designgraphique/_archives_etudiants/DNSEP_2016/Clarisse_Podesta/(Geoff%20Cox+Alex%20McLean)%20Speaking%20Code.pdf


Notes:

Code describes what it does and does it.

Power of speech and the paradoxical lost of the voice.

Machine-human communication have integrated affect, intellect and language into production.

"The fact that the user ’ s thoughts and actions are some-
what determined by the operating system or graphical user interface recalls the ways
the user is interpellated in the Althusserian sense to demonstrate how ideology calls
us to order through its God-like commands and procedures."

Kittler says that we can understand code throught: command and control.

"Although instructional, program code cannot simply be reduced
to its functional aspects, as it also extends the instability already inherent to the rela-
tionship of speech to writing, where it can also go out of control."

Code can exist through ideology too. The idea of interpellation of Althusser is relevant here.

As one's subjectivity forms when it recognises interpellation, so we can think of software. It is meaningful as long as it interpellates.

Butler (exitable speech): words and actions are related. You say something and it can alter the world. 

"As linguistic beings we are bound to language as part of the constitution
of subjectivity (as Althusser described it), so the call to order starts as a form of insult,
and we enter into language antagonistically."

"The speculation is that esoteric languages similarly
shift attention from command and control toward cultural expression and refusal"


How can actions emerge from a speaking subject if it is speaking what forms the subject in the first place?

"Interpellation seems to be bound up in contradiction in this respect, poised
between the subject that speaks and the subject that is constituted through speech. If
subjects are constituted in language in this paradoxical way, it follows that they also
have the ability to reconstitute themselves through language, and even reconstitute
the institution of language itself."

"it is not that interpellation doesn ’ t occur but that it operates in ever
more subtle ways across complex informational networks, along with the networked
forms of subjectivity it partly constitutes."

"So although on the surface program code appears to
operate in a similar sovereign manner with straightforward agency, namely a command
to execute an instruction from sovereign code, the argument that unfolds through
this book is that in significant ways these operations are also prone to bugs and failure,
and in significant ways can be considered to be out of control, like speech."


"the practice of live
coding exemplifies how the practice of coding, its writing, working, and creative use,
establishes an unstable relation to its output. In this sense, although of course code
largely determines its output, the broader apparatus including the idiosyncrasies of
the programmer provide indeterminate outcomes and help to stress the expressive
dimension of software production as a whole."

Code produces an unstable relationship with its output. ***** this is very relevant.


We have to understand code as expression and action. 

"excitable program code."


Something exceeds the "command and control" possibilities of code as it has efects that cannot be determine only be the expression implied in the code. 

-- Coding Expression

Code as procedure and expression.

More than the demonstration of formal logic.

Literate programming paradigm is invoked as a form of expression that shifts the meaning of coding (beyond command and control)

"here are many examples of recursion that encourage the author or
reader to reflect on their role within the construction of the text, and on the ways in
which meaning is constructed."

Epistemologic recursion (the text talks about recursive epistemology but I am interested in the other concept)

Not only execution is the only meaning code acquires but also the "literate" commentaries that are meaningfull to other programers. Double coding refers to this two expressive forms of code.

"The example, using a technique referred to as double (or multiple) coding, exempli-
fies the material aspects of code both on a functional and an expressive level, even if
it further confuses interpretation by its nonfunctionality or inability to communicate
clearly (which is part of the point, of course)."

"program code has an aesthetic dimension that extends
beyond the conventions of programming which stress the efficiency and brevity of
source code."

Like executable code, there is something overdetermined about all writing in this
sense. In “ Talking Back, ” bell hooks stresses the inherent politics of forms of writing
that hold on to speech, for both writing and speech can express resistance to forms
of power — as with the rejection of capital letters in her name.

This is what we are going to be talking about: formal logic and meaning.

So, we are going to talk about the realm of what is possible and the realm of meaning and how they enmeshe through code.


We live in the era of "despotic numbers" according to Badiou, that is why articulating logic with meaning-production makes sense to the author.

"insisting on a discourse
that derives from an understanding of the human condition and of politics that oper-
ates through language rather than simply through the economy"

"But under the present conditions of finan-
cial capitalism, human action is rendered economic and its force is annulled, as it is
“ expressed not with words but with numbers, ” as Boris Groys put it."















