Reading: Generational Time book: Feminism, Time, and Nonlinear History. Breaking Feminist Waves

Author: Victoria Browne

Units: 0.76666666666667, Zone:time studies

Bibliography:Browne, Victoria. 2014.Generational TimeChapter 5 in Feminism, Time, and Nonlinear History. Breaking Feminist Waves. Palgrave Macmillan, New York pp. 119-141

Links:https://www.dukeupress.edu/in-the-meantime


Notes:



Generational time is a relational time.  Not only in births and deaths, but it refers to a set of symbols and metaphors. Construction of symbolic generational order.

The idea of lineage is critiqued since it evokes "Oedipal models of relationality, which revolve around rivalry,
prohibition, repression, and rebellion."


Different ways of relating will produce different forms of time.

the complex temporal logics of negotiation, repetition, appropriation,
and reinvention.

There is a desire to create intellectual and emotional connection between the feminists of the past, present and future.

Combat the erasue of feminists and the feminist struggle.

Avoid generational mentality that canibalises on other generations. Avoid divisveness.

From older to younger: Instruction rather than dialogue. 

An anxiety that the next generation will not follow the footsteps of the older.

The more the maternal authority is impossed, the more likely that the youngest will fullfill such anxiety.


And the younger generation feels an anxiety to create a movement of its own.

The young canibalise the old and the old impose over the young.

Full force of oedipal logic here, but also causality plays an important role: the older generation are bound to the younger ones by causality.

The problem is not generational identification but the linearity that is overcoded to generational thinking.

“any biological rhythm must work itself out through the medium of social events” <- Mannheim wrote this.
Very interesting, time can be understood simultaneously as a biological (or geological or mathematical) phenomenon or as something that depends in the medium of social events.

So generational relationships should be qualified beyond chronological and biological time (age and the time period [80s 90s, etc]). There should be a quality that puts in communication two agents of perhaps different chronological times and ages.

Instead of naturalising age and temporal convergence to define what a generation is we need to qualify relationship to asses their belonging to a same generational movement.

Regarding the issue around generations in terms of coexistence rather than succession!!! ***

Coexistence can produce not only continuity and succession but rupture and discontinuity (and of course, everything in the middle)

Desire plays an important role on what determines different relationship between generations:

(Browne, 2014, p. 124)
"My suggestion is that the particular mix of desires, and the way
that they are relationally played out, will result in different tempo-
ralizations of generational time, with varying degrees of continuity
and discontinuity, connection, and rupture."


Patriarchy and the colonisation of the genealogical! ***** 

There is a critique of oedipal relationships and genealogy as an expression of it.

The oedipal conflicts earlier pointed out have to do with the patriarchal colonisation of genealogy:

the “political matricide” that sets younger feminists against older
feminists arises because there is no adequate cultural alternative to the
patriarchal rules and meanings governing genealogical and intergen-
erational relations.

Women need to mimic patriarchal kinship relationships.


The relationship with the mothers and motherhood most be porblematised if we should position women as symbolic subjects.

Both lacan and freud are deply invested in the paternal figure at the expense of the maternal.

For Lacan, the child and the mother stary as an undifferentiated entity that is "broken" into parts by the paternal figure:

"However, feminist
theorists have argued that the Lacanian account is equally problem-
atic, because it still depends upon the idea that the mother–child
relation has to be mediated via a third term if the child is to success-
fully enter cultural life."

Lacan displaces the paternal oedipal problem fromt the biological (as it is understood by Freud) to the socio-linguistic.

Matricidal bases of wetsern culture.

Irigaray's:
The placental economy tries to provide a mediating organ, the placenta, as a way to differentiate the fetus from the mother.

The placenta as a mediating third party model produces a way in which intergenerational communication can be achieved between women.

This sounds promising:

-----Shifting Symbolics and Historical Resonances :

The oedipal is critiqued not only through lacan and freud but also the structuralist sociologist Levi-Strauss.

Myth and symbolic reality seems sort of fixed and appears particularly fixed in language.

kinship is always heterosexual.

Kinshipm models that do not align with the oedipal model.

Kinship is a doing. A kind of practice!!

Instead, kinship is a practice that enacts a specific assemblage of significations as it takes place: a “mobile classificatory technology,” which generates, and responds to, particular material, relational, and cultural worlds (ibid.; Butler 2002, 34–6).


But post-kinship sociologist claim that the symbolic doe snot precede the social and has not independence from it.

Queer people and people udner the context of transatlantic slave trade have developed different ways of understanding kinship from the suppressing practices of slavery and nuclear heteronormative family.

(Browne, 2014, p. 136)
"the histories and legacies of slavery
reveal that the meanings of “family,” “genealogy,” and “kinship” are
fundamentally unstable, and determined through property relations
and racialized systems of domination"

About repetition and variation:

the structuring technique of
“repetition of variation” does not accede to the linear order of succes-
sion, but equally does not set up a juxtaposition between “continu-
ity” on the one hand, and “discontinuity” on the other. It thereby
enables Jones to capture the complexities and ambiguities of genera-
tional time

As implied by the idea of “repeti-
tion with variation,” the way that we take up or repeat the past in
the present the present is variable, and does not conform to a fixed
pattern. Generational orders have flexible and complex meanings and
temporalities, operating within the orbit of multiple symbolic logics,
cultural imaginaries, and historical resonances.







































































