Reading: Is There Love in the Telematic Embrace? (1990)

Author: Roy Ascott

Units: 0.5, Zone:network music

Bibliography:Ascott, Roy. 2003.Is There Love in the Telematic Embrace? (1990)Chapter 16 in Telematic Embrace: Visionary Theories of Art, Technology, and Consciousness. (Ed.) Edward A. Shanken. Berkeley, CA:University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-21803-1 pp. 232-246

Links:https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/lmj.2009.19.103c


Notes:

Telecommmunications and computer converging. Various cybernetic systems: video, audio capture, audio synthesis, etc...


Telematic culture. Seems to me that network theorists are quite focused in the generation of subjectivities from the "telematic culture"

Niuce definition of telematics:

"“Telematics” is a term used to designate computer-mediated com-munications networking involving telephone, cable, and satellite linksbetween geographically dispersed individuals and institutions thatare interfaced to data-processing systems, remote sensing devices,and capacious data storage banks [ Nora and Minc 1980]."

What is the content of the telematic art formal display?

"deep-seated fears of themachine coming to dominate the human will and of a technological formalismerasing human content and values."

*** Is there love in the telematic embrace? ***


Bring together various forms of sensing and hypermedia in the digital realm.

""" Menaing is not created by the artist""""

"Meaning is the product of interaction between the observer and the system, the con-tent of which is in a state of flux, of endless change and transformation"

"It is a model that requires, for its completion, the viewer as, at best, askilled decoder or interpreter of the artist’s “meaning,” or, at worst, simply apassive receptacle of such meaning"

"This sunrise of uncertainty, of a joyous dance of meaning between layers of genreand metaphoric systems, this unfolding tissue woven of a multiplicity of visualcodes and cultural imaginations was also the initial promise of the postmodernproject before it disappeared into the domain of social theory, leaving only itsfrail corpus of pessimism and despair."

"The  emerging  new  order  of  art  is  that  of  interactivity,  of  “dispersed  au-thorship”;3the canon is one of contingency and uncertainty."


Art object == interface

"The new order of perception it constitutes can be called“global vision,” since its distributed sensorium and distributed intelligence"

Cybernetics align with the modenrist dream of making the invisible visible and the inaudible audible.

" Human  perception,  understood  as  the  product  of  activenegotiation  rather  than  passive  reception,  thus  requires,  within  this  evolvingsymbiosis  of  human/machine,  telematic  links  of  considerable  complexity  be-tween  the  very  diverse  nodes  of  the  worldwide  artificial  reticular  sensorium."

"It may not be an exaggeration to say that the“content” of a telematic art will depend in large measure on the nature of theinterface; that is, the kinds of configurations and assemblies of image, sound,and text, the kinds of restructuring and articulation of environment that tele-matic interactivity might yield, will be determined by the freedoms and fluid-ity available at the interface."

"The further development of this field will clearly mean aninterdependence of artistic, scientific, and technological competencies and as-pirations and, urgently, on the formulation of a transdisciplinary education."

"More than a technological expedient for the in-terchange of information, networking provides the very infrastructure for spir-itual interchange that could lead to the harmonisation and creative developmentof the whole planet. With this prospectus, however naively optimistic and transcendental it may appear in our current fin-de-siècle gloom, the metaphor oflove in the telematic embrace may not be entirely misplaced."




























