Reading: Lived Time and Polytemporality book: Feminism, Time, and Nonlinear History. Breaking Feminist Waves

Author: Victoria Browne

Units: 0.76666666666667, Zone:time studies

Bibliography:Browne, Victoria. 2014.Lived Time and PolytemporalityChapter 1 in Feminism, Time, and Nonlinear History. Breaking Feminist Waves. Palgrave Macmillan, New York pp. 25-47

Links:https://www.dukeupress.edu/in-the-meantime


Notes:

Feminism is not the object of a singular history! But multiple histories

A single history segmented into 'waves' or 'phases' ¿?

Greater hegemonic model that systematically misrepresents the struggles and questions of feminism.

Fernandes proposes a history that is as much about the past as it is about the future. Thus, not linear but multidirectional.

But how this idea becomes somehting more than pure metaphor (that can be easily dismissed in an academic context). 

Distinguishing betbween a metaphysical and a scientific conception of time.

Science <- empirical data, mathematical models, etc // metaphysics <- speculative, gap between the empirical and the cognitive, etc

(Browne, 2014, p. 27)
"The notion of lived time, in contrast, pertains to the way that different individuals and societies think, feel, behave, and relate to one another according to their experiences of, and ideas about, time."

Pay attention to the notion of lived time!!

Copernican turn -> the time it produces (through Kant) is a time that is "a function of our minds" (Kant provides a first step)

for Kant, time is not something that is known
or experienced. Instead, he proposes that time is a transcendental
condition of knowledge and experience. “Time is not an empirical
concept that has been derived from any experience,” he writes in his
“Transcendental Aesthetic,” nor is it a “discursive concept” (Kant
2007, 74–5, A30/B46). Rather, time is an a priori form or “intu-
ition” that is imposed on to the “manifold of sense experience” via
three distinct modes: persistence or duration, simultaneity, and suc-
cession


So time is not experienced, it is not something that we live, but it is an a priori, a trascendental condition that precedes human experience.

So time here is not understood as an obective condition, pregiven to the subject.


Time becomes phenomenological in a broader sense. How consciousness orients itself towards objects of experience.

Bracketing the natural attitude (science and metaphysics).

Again, Husserlian retention and protention, the immidate past and future, The past that can be retained in memory and the future that can be extrapolated from intuition and observation.

The husserl example, a melody. If we could only assess the absolute present of a melody we will be listening to a sequence of discrete instants of sound without being able to make sense the totality or the intentionality of the whole. 

A melody requires us to remember and had a slight intuition about where is the melody going.


Time is a complex blend of what is present and what is absent.


But historical time, given its massive dimensions, needs to give due emphasise to intersubjective phenomena. And thus, needs a form of time that can be considered intersubjective. How this plays with the (profoundly subjective) time described by Husserl?


“Temporalization,” as Johannes Fabian explains, is “a complex
praxis of encoding Time” with various dimensions including the lin-
guistic, the interpretative, and the performative (Fabian 1983, 74). By
“temporalizations of history,” therefore, I mean the collective practice
of endowing “history” or historical trajectories with a particular tem-
poral structure, and relating pasts, presents, and futures in socially
and politically significant ways (Koselleck 2004; Osborne 1995, 200;
Ricoeur 1988, 104)



Temporalization as a complex praxis of coding time!!!!! <- this is super interesting. follow it up!!!

So history-making, historizing is a praxis. lol


Our praxis of time-keeping and hsitory production, whose futures they enable?


Keep in mind the author's critique to the new materialist argument of time creation based on scientific viewpoints:

(Browne, 2014, p. 30) 
"Historical time is intertwined with biological, geo-
logical, and astronomical times and temporalities, but it is also deter-
mined through sociocultural systems of representation and schemas
of shared experience (Chakrabarty 2000, 74)."


So you can do deep geological and natural-scientific time conceptualisations at the same time that time from a sociopolitical perspective. Perhaps the effectsw of deeper ontological time observations can be analysed and described through historiography, etc.

To claim that
historical time is a mediated or operationalized form of time does
not mean that historical time is not “real,” or that historiographical
enquiry must retreat from all questions of ontology. Rather, from a
non- or “postpositivist” perspective, 13 the reality of an abstract idea
or concept such as “historical time” exists in its effects: its manifesta-
tion in social practices, relations, and structures, and its role within conceptual schemas



The fundamental idea emerging from studies
and accounts of lived time is that lived time is qualitatively different
from serial, chronological temporality.


Thinking of time as time-knotts. Similar to the percolating time though by XXXXX. Perhaps?


Politemṕorality. Composability (curious that this is the world that describes it at first) and internal complexity.


history:: (time,space)

So: history x . history y 

(Browne, 2014, p. 31)
Dipesh Chakrabarty, for example, insists that historical time is “out of joint
with itself”; hence, “the writing of history must always presume a plu-
rality of times coexisting together”

History is many histories super-imposed.  Each moving at its pace and tempo.!!

So where there are multiple histories there is no totality. No time as a priori that is pregiven. There is no time as an empty field in which we code or uncode history.


Following this line of argument, I will propose
the idea of “complex coevalness” as a way of making sense of “dif-
ferent times at the same time” without recourse to the concept of
totality or oneness.


COMPLEX COEVALNESS

How to renounce Hegel and his view of history? How do we avoid a conception of time that is totalising?


Think about Nancarrow here. An absolute Hegelian. What this means to my interpetation of Nancarrow?


One single time that underlies all the othertrs????   <- How about recursivity?


The “solution” to the “aporia of totality,” Ricoeur
claims, can be found in the Kantian notion of the regulative idea,
because it enables us to rethink the idea of “history” itself —in the
collective singular—as a regulative idea that “stands over and against”
the axiom of the oneness of time (1988, 257–8)



For Ricoeur, the question or the contraargument is: Is it necessary to think of a totality in a knatian sense?


Accordingly, those who
insist that we must think in terms of temporal totality or “one” his-
torical time may be “constitutionally unprepared” for the possibility
that there are unknown or unforeseen ways of thinking and configur-
ing historical time (ibid.). 20

Reject totality!


So, no totality but multiple times interelating and co-existing simultaneously.

HOW????

“synchronous,” “contemporary,” and “coeval.”
“synchronicity” refers to events occurring at the same physical time; 21
“contemporaneity” refers to co-occurrence in “typological” time (i.e.,
periodized time); and “coevalness” refers to the active “occupation”
or sharing of time

(Browne, 2014, p. 39)
“Coevalness,” Fabian explains,
“is a mode of temporal relations. It cannot be defined as a thing
or state with certain properties. It is not ‘there’ and cannot be put
there; it must be created or at least approached” (ibid., 34). The rea-
son that coevalness must be created, Fabian argues, is that coevalness
is the condition for communication. “The term coevalness ,” he writes,
“marks a central assumption, namely that all temporal relations . . . are
embedded in culturally organized praxis.” If social interaction pre-
supposes intersubjectivity, then intersubjectivity, in turn, is inconceiv-
able without assuming that the participants are coeval, that they share
time. “Communication,” then, is “ultimately about creating shared
Time” (ibid., 34).

Coevalness is about creating communication through shared time.

Coevalness condition of communication!!!!


Create the praxis of a shared temporality. That is a condition for creating history withoug totallity and localist essentialism!

Forging temporal connecgtions!!

The need to create temporal spaces in which temporal communication is possible.

Anzald ú a highlights the shifting
allegiances and competing claims that have resulted from invasions
and re-invasions, as the land has variously been “home” to Native
Mexican and American civilizations, to Spanish conquistadors and
Anglo-Americans (Bastian 2011, 158). Bastian’s interest in the pas-
sage focuses on Anzald ú a’s use of a “confusing amalgam of incongru-
ent presents, pasts and futures,”


Non-congruency!!


all this in page 41
"As such, Anzald ú a’s complex evocations and negotiations of
her heritage implicitly offer an account of time that “enables contra-
dictory histories and contradictory ways of acting to share the same
time, to be coeval with each other”(ibid., 162; see also Fernandes
2010)."

Contradiction becomes a possibility

Indeed, from this perspective, “to be coeval (i.e., to live in
the same time with another),” is precisely about recognizing “the
multiple lines of time and of history that operate within the pres-
ent” (ibid., 157–8).

So multiple histories do not relate in an additive way. But the present is filled with pasts and futures.

Rather than projecting
a higher totality, then, the task is to generate “conjoined and disjunc-
tive” genealogies, as we “contemplate the necessarily fragmentary his-
tories of human belonging,” which never add up to a totality, a whole,
or a one (ibid., 125). 26


how to be able to see the nature of global capitalism and polytemporality as understood here?????


Here the idea of actualising networks is very helpful!!  History from a technical totalising perspective needs another history from a more affective point of view

Chakrabarty in fact adopts this idea of the dual perspective of
History 1 and History 2 from the distinction Marx draws in the
posthumously published Theories of Surplus Value between two kinds
of histories: histories “posited by capital” and histories that do not
belong to capital’s “life process”


The analysis of Marxist history is relevant pay attention to it!!! History 1 totalising history history 2 the polytemporal one
History 1. They “do not constitute
a dialectical Other of the necessary logic of History 1,” because “to
think thus would be to subsume History 2 to History 1” (ibid., 66).
Instead, History 2s should be understood as polytemporal pasts and
life forms that are entangled with History 1, yet constantly interrupt
its “totalizing thrusts.” These pasts and life forms “may be under the
institutional domination of the logic of capital and exist in proximate
relationship to it, but they also do not belong to the ‘life process’ of
capital” (ibid.). They are not “automatically aligned with it” (ibid.),
and continually interrupt and “punctuate the run of capital’s own
logic” (ibid., 64). This idea contravenes the supposition that the logic
of capital sublates all differences into itself, and allows us to make
room for the “politics of human belonging and diversity” (ibid., 67).
It gives rise to an approach of frustrating the totalizing ambitions of
global capitalism, by seizing on the fact that geopolitically diffuse
temporalities will always exceed and obstruct globalizing orders of
unification, rationalization, and alignment, even as they intersect and
intertwine with them.


This thesis does not eliminate the totality, it puts it in relationship with polytemporality and qualifies the difference between the two.










































































































