Reading: Making the beings of Technology Visible

Author: Bruno Latour

Units: 0.8, Zone:theory

Bibliography:Bruno Latour (2013). Making the Beings of Technology Visible. ch. 8 in An Inquiry into Modes of Existence: An Anthropology of the Moderns. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. pp. 207-232

Links:no URL provided


Notes:

Change is what is meant with technology apparently...


“The modernization front al-
lowed the Moderns to represent themselves,” we speculated, “as the peo-
ple who put an end to superstitions and finally discovered the effective-
ness of technologies.”

“idealism of materialism” of
the Moderns

What defines modernity: "the art and manner of deploying technology"

There is nothing reflexive about the way we approach technology?

"How have the Moderns managed to miss the strangeness, the ubiquity, and yes, the spirituality
of technology?"


Technology == mini-trascendence ¿?¿?¿?


"The world, or rather the multiverse, is thus
full of—or rather, no, the multiverse is constantly emptied out by—circu-
lating transcendences that dig down into it, all along a subtle dotted line
formed by the leaps and the thresholds that have to be crossed one after
another in order to exist a little longer. In short, an obstacle course."

"It is no acci-
dent that the very notion of network (this time in the sense of the actor-
network theory ) cut its teeth, as it were, on the foregoing domain of
technology. This is because we have to add various things for any tech-
nology to start working"

Technology as a network!

"The more one studies technological arrange-
ments, the more one considers their ins and outs, the less chance one has
of unifying them in a coherent whole."


(latour, 2013, p. 14)
"When we talk about a “technological infrastructure,” we are always designating
a more or less patched-together mix of arrangements from more or less
everywhere that others seek to render irreversible by protecting it from
analysis, making it a carefully sealed and concealed black box"


Technological infrastructure tends to be black boxed. Protected from analysis.

"Everything that has been set up, can be broken down"

That is apparently why constructivism is useful. 

But how about law? How about copyright?

Every movement, every change needs a mediation, and this mediatyion is porbably an instance of technology.

But not everything is tech, there are also beings of reproduction like trees:
"And yet we have a clear sense that by assimilating the hammock
with the tree this way, by assimilating the beings of technology with
the beings of reproduction [repâ•›·â•›tec] , we would be making a diag-
nostic error as surely as if we confused them with networks"

"“There’s a trick to it,” just
waiting to be found; that’s the whole thing in a nutshell."


^^ Tech seems to be the outcome of ingenio.


"Technology, for its part, seeks to be
forgotten. Definitely, it is about technology rather than nature that we
can say “it likes to hide.”"

Technology likes to be hidden and forgotten but is this exclusively true to technology? How about cheap labour? 


"Contrary to the title of Simondon’s book,
it isn’t the mode of existence of the technological object that we must
address but the mode of existence of technology, of technological beings
themselves."


"Whereas the whole experience rebels against such a
mutilation, he has acted as though technology, too, transports mere infor-
mation, mere forms, without deformation."


"technology (used here in the sense of reflection
on technology)"

Nothing, no information, can be transported without transformation.!! <- ************

"Give me needs and concepts, the form will arise from them and
the matter will follow."  <- "If there is an unworthy way to treat technologies, it lies in
believing that they are means toward ends."

"Just as there was, in epis-
temology, a theory of objectivity as “correspondence” between map and
territory, there is in technology a theory of effectiveness as correspondence
between form and function."

The invisible presence of technology is not a derivative of pure science. But it in fact shows that science is effective.


Technology leaves objects behind, such objects are opaque. In order to make sense of technology we need to understand the movements, processes and specially the trajectories from which the provisional segments (the objects of technology) emerge from.


"The test of
this encounter with such sequences is easy to administer: it suffices to
stand idly in front of a “gadget,” a “gimmick” whose meaning completely
eludes you—perhaps a gift you have received, or an apparatus whose
purpose is unclear, or a rock from the Châtelperronian period with cut
marks made by someone who disappeared forty thousand years ago:
everything is there, and yet nothing is visible. As if the object were only the
print of a trajectory whose direction escapes you and that you have to
learn to reconstitute, a fragment at a time."

When we confront a technological object, we require its context or else we can see that everything is there but what really matters, what is proper to technology, eludes us.

So is this true?

“No, I didn’t say anything of the sort, for the good reason that technologies
precede humans by hundreds of thousands of years. I am simply saying
that if you are capable, you Moderns, of leaving out the paths of refer-
ence when you speak of objective knowledge, you are perfectly capable
of leaving out what is responsible for the instauration of technolog-
ical objects on the pretext (which is also true) that they hold up on their
own once they are launched. Except that they can never remain alone
and without care—which is also true! It is only the flow of operational
sequences that allows us to sketch them.”

The figure of the artisan is invoked again:

"As we can see, the adjective “technological” does not designate
in the first place an object, a result, but a movement that is going to take
from inert entities and from living ones—including the body of the
artisan, which becomes more skillful by the day—what is needed to
hold together in a lasting way, to freeze, as it were, one of the moments
of metamorphosis."


Composite is a key feature of technological movements.

"What is certain
is that the technological detour leaves behind a differential, a gradient of
resistance, a whole leaf-pile or layering of diverse materials that holds up
“on its own” and at the same time can be dispersed. The expression tradu-
tore, traditore applies much better to technologies than to texts."

"Don’t try to grasp the movement of a tech-
nology that’s “working,” but rather the gropings of innovation, precisely
where something is not yet working and obliges the artisan to start over
several times, going from one obstacle to the next."

It is the artisan exploring the margins that will find new technology:
"To say that technologies are effective, transparent, or mastered is to take the
conclusion for the pathway that led to them. It is to miss their spirit, their
genesis, their beauty, their truth."


The way in which this lateral exploration produces new technological objects might be understood as:
"We shall call it technical folding . We could have used the
word project , as opposed to “object,”"

This paragraph is key: ****************************
"The term “folding” will allow us to avoid the blunder of speaking
of technology irreverently as a piling up of objects or as an admirable
example of mastery, transparence, rationality, that would prove “man’s
dominion over matter.” Technology always entails folds upon folds,
implications, complications, explanations. Its canonical representation,
thoroughly studied by the sociology of technologies, sketches it in the
form of a series, often a very long series, of nested translations , a laby-
rinth. There is technical folding every time we can bring to light this
second-level transcendence that comes to interrupt, bend, deflect, cut
out the other modes of existence, and thus by a clever ploy introduces a
differential of materials."

"We can talk about technical folding with respect to the delicate establishment
of muscular habits that make us, through apprenticeship, competent
beings endowed with a high degree of skill, just as well as to talk about
the molten iron that spews out of the Mittal blast furnaces, or to desig-
nate the distinction between a software program and its compiler,"

"With the folding of technological beings, a dislocation of the action
emerges into the world and makes it possible to differentiate between
two levels, the starting level and the one toward which you have precisely
shifted gears by installing in it other actors who possess different resist-
ances, different durations, different degrees of solidity."



By freeing the beings of technology from their
mode gives us more association with matter; by localizing their effec-
tiveness a little bit ahead of the fabricating subjects;
by completely abandoning the notion of mastery
and transparence; by letting these beings explore the entire gamut of
materials; by no longer obliging them to remain confined in the narrow
prison of means and ends, the inquiry could not only become compatible
with the long history of technologies and the slow anthropogenesis that
they have allowed, it could also open up less uneven interactions with
the other collectives, since all humans are the children of what they have
worked on.


















