Reading: Micropolitiques and segmentaerity - A Thousand Plateaus

Author: Gilles Deleuze & Felix Guattari

Units: 0.73333333333333, Zone:theory

Bibliography:Deleuze, Gilles & Guattari, Félix. 1993. 'Micropolitiques and segmentaerity' in A Thousand Plateaus. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Links:https://libcom.org/files/Anti-Oedipus.pdf


Notes:

Our lives are segmented in various ways: binary (male/female, rich/poor, child/adult, etc), circular (my affairs, my neighborhood's affairs, my city's, my country's, the world's ..) or linear (when we finish a proceeding another one begins: family, school, army, job, etc.) segmentations.

These segments will inform the "kind" of deterritorialisation (either relative or absolute).

The subject is transformed by proceedings that come with the segmentation process.

The segmentation is always dependant on the point of view and it is never absolute (or objective).

The goal of the chapter is to shade a light over fascism.

This segmentation is already present amongst the "primitive" in the pyramidal formation that is at the same time a line and a circle as well as it proceeds in binaries.

"Primitive segmentarity is characterized by a polyvocal code
based on lineages and their varying situations and relations, and an
itinerant territoriality based on local, overlapping divisions. Codes and
territories, clan lineages and tribal territorialities, form a fabric of
relatively supple segmentarity."

Segmentation and centralisation are not a relevant oposition. 

DnG understand the divide between primitive and modern as yet another binary segmentation.

Modern life has not ended segmentarity, it has just made it more efficient and "exceptionally rigid".

There are two kinds of segmentarity in modern States: one that is "primitive" and supple and another that is "modern" and rigid.

Binary division seems to be product of a modern totalisation that always exlcudes the in-the-middles. In primitive groups the binary emerges from the alliances made for the existence of the group. This is reversed in modern States, the binary precedes everything, that is why deviations from the binary are assessed as that: deviations.

Concentric circular segmentation in primitive societies has many "centres", concentric segmentation in modern societies is hypercentralised (as in the State). Concentric segmentation has to do with roots and arborified structures (rather than the primitive rizhomes).

Linear segmentation is related to geometry and the axiomatic/problematic divide:
here geometry is udnerstood as continuous lines that never form discrete forms.

From Adkins:
"The  state-form  privileges the Euclidean conception as it seeks to overcode its ter-ritory by drawing boundary lines. The state divides its domain into rigid segments. It builds walls to mark the boundary between inside and outside, civilized and barbarian. Colonization is the overcoding of supple linear segmentarity with rigid linear segmentarity."

From DnG:
"Private property implies a space that has been overcoded and
gridded by surveying. Not only does each line have its segments, but the
segments of one line correspond to those of another; for example, the wage
regime establishes a correspondence between monetary segments, produc-
tion segments, and consumable-goods segments."

Basically we are talking about arborescent and rizhomatic structures.

"We may summarize the principal differences between rigid segmentarity
and supple segmentarity. In the rigid mode, binary segmentarity stands on
its own and is governed by great machines of direct binarization, whereas in
the other mode, binarities result from "multiplicities of n dimensions." Sec-
ond, circular segmentarity tends to become concentric, in other words,
causes all of its focal points to coincide in a single center that is in constant
movement but remains invariant through its movements, and is part of a
machine of resonance. Finally, linear segmentarity feeds into a machine of
overcoding that constitutes more geometrico homogeneous space and
extracts segments that are determinate as to their substance, form, and rela-
tions."

Primitive work space out by coding and territories. Modern States "have replaced the declining codes with a univocal overcoding, and the lost territories with a specific reterritorialization (which takes place in an overcoded geometrical space)." 

"Segmentarity is always the result of an abstract machine, but different abstract machines operate in the rigid and the supple."

It is not enough to understand these different kinds of segmentation (rizhomatic and arborecent) in opposition or antagonism to each other. But to understand how a State (which tends and favours) abstract machines that work in a rigid way needs the supple "primitive" structures that hold their rigidity together. In the other way as well, "primitive" groups hold arborescent structures in their centres that anticipate the formation of the State.

Both structures are always in relationship to each other!

"Supple segmentarity cannot be restricted to primitive peoples. It is not the
vestige of the savage within us but a perfectly contemporary function,
inseparable from the other. Every society, and every individual, are thus
plied by both segmentarities simultaneously: one molar, the other molecu-
lar."

"In short, everything is political, but every politics is simultaneously a macropolitics and a
micropolitics."


So molar and molecular organisations emerge here:


From Adkins:
"Molar organization is more calcified; it describes the relations among discrete objects. Molecular organization is more fluid; it describes the relations among flows of intensities. These two types of organization are distinct but inseparable.  Everything  is  both  molar  and  molecular  at  the  same  time."


The more molar something is the more it resist change, the more molecular something is the more favours it; the more it can form lines of flight. 

(it is safe to imply that deterritorialisation happens in a molecular level)

The molecular is that space between the lines of flight and the molar (rigid, not changing) space. WHere the new can be thought and formed. But also this is the space in which stronger more rigid molar structures can be formed. In the molecular is where an event is defined to either detterritorialise or reterritorialise.

Adkins: "Schizoanalysis or pragmatics unfolds all three lines to see not only the promise but the danger in each."

Fascism is totalitarian. But there are other kind of regimes that are totalitarian as well, like Stalinism. The idea ot a totalitarian State can only be applied at a molar register. The particularity of Fascism is its inseparability from molecular formations.

These molecular formations start to resonate with each other before the rise of the Fascist molar State.

"Rural fascism and city or neighborhood fascism, youth fascism and war veteran's
fascism, fascism of the Left and fascism of the Right, fascism of the couple,
family, school, and office: every fascism is defined by a micro-black hole
that stands on its own and communicates with the others, before resonat-
ing in a great, generalized central black hole."


-- This relates to treatise on Nomadology. When every microfascism is turned into a war-machine then there will be fascism at every level.

"There is fascism when a war machine is installed in each hole, in every niche. Even after the National
Socialist State had been established, microfascisms persisted that gave it
unequaled ability to act upon the "masses.""


Fascism penetrates every cell of society at every level.

"What makes fascism dangerous is its molecular or micropolitical
power, for it is a mass movement: a cancerous body rather than a totalitar-
ian organism."

THIS:
"Only microfascism provides an answer to the global question: Why does desire desire its own repression, how can it desire its own repression? The masses certainly do not passively submit to power; nor do they "want" to be repressed, in a kind of masochistic hysteria; nor are they tricked by an ideological lure. Desire is never separable from complex assemblages that necessarily tie into molecular levels, from microformations already shaping postures, attitudes, perceptions, expectations, semiotic systems, etc. Desire is never an undifferentiated instinctual energy, but itself results from a highly developed, engineered setup rich in interactions: a whole supple segmentarity that processes molecular energies and potentially gives desire a fascist determination.
Leftist organizations will not be the last to secrete microfascisms. It's too easy to be antifascist on the molar level, and not even see the fascist inside you, the fascist you yourself sustain and nourish and cherish with molecules both personal and collective."

fascist determination of desire. What is this?

Desire is never individual, desire is always entangled with the desire of others.

From Adkins: "The task of schizoanalysis is to uncover the multiple competing segmentations and draw their lines of flight."

From Adkins: "Segmentation  is  thus  the  molar  appropriation  of  a  molecular  flow.  The  segment  cannot  fully  dominate  the  flow.  Something  always escapes"


The weightier the molar organisation, the more atomised the molecular segmentation becomes. When you have a totalising system there

In a world dominated by total-capitalism it is safe to say that in a micro-organisational level, in a molecular register, there is a lot of fear and insecurity. Since every aspect of life (no matter how small it is) which is not surveyed becomes a source of anxiety and fear.

"It is wrongly said (in Marxism in particular) that a society is defined by its contradictions. That is true only on the larger scale of things. From the viewpoint of micropolitics, a society is defined by its lines of flight, which are molecular. There is always something that flows or flees, that escapes the binary organizations, the resonance apparatus, and the overcoding machine: things that are attributed to a "change in values," the youth, women, the mad, etc."

"The reverse, however, is also true: molecular escapes and
movements would be nothing if they did not return to the molar organisation"

Lines or segment will often refer to the molar.

Segment lines continue as quantum flows in the middle a "power centre" can be found.

Something always escapes the flows of power. Things cannot be segmented. Segments are the capture of molar structures of the flow inherent of molecular structures.

"Imitation is the propagation of
a flow; opposition is binarization, the making binary of flows; invention is a
conjugation or connection of different flows. What, according to Tarde, is a
flow? It is belief or desire (the two aspects of every assemblage); a flow is
always of belief and of desire. Beliefs and desires are the basis of every
society, because they are flows and as such are "quantifiable"; they are
veritable social Quantities, whereas sensations are qualitative and
representations are simple resultants."

"For in the end, the
difference is not at all between the social and the individual (or
interindividual), but between the molar realm of representations, individual
or collective, and the molecular realm of beliefs and desires in which the
distinction between the social and the individual loses all meaning since
flows are neither attributable to individuals nor overcodable by collective
signifiers."

"This is how you tell the difference between the segmented line and the
quantum flow. A mutant flow always implies something tending to elude or
escape the codes; quanta are precisely signs or degrees of
deterrito-rialization in the decoded flow. The rigid line, on the other
hand, implies an overcoding that substitutes itself for the faltering codes; its
segments are like reterritorializations on the overcoding or overcoded line."

Example using Roman empire and barbarian invasions:

"On one side, we have the rigid segmentarity
of the Roman Empire, with its center of resonance and periphery, its
State, its pax romana, its geometry, its camps, its limes (boundary lines).
Then, on the horizon, there is an entirely different kind of line, the line of
the nomads who come in off the steppes, venture a fluid and active escape,
sow deterritorialization everywhere, launch flows whose quanta heat up and
are swept along by a Stateless war machine."

The three lines; line of flight, molecular quanta and molar segments, coexist and are not happening in sequence (one after the other) but simultaneously.

Two abstract machines operating simultaneously: an abstract amchine that overcodes. This is the machine related with the State Aparatus. "it defines a rigid segmentarity, a macrosegmentarity, because it
produces or rather reproduces segments, opposing them two by two, mak-
ing all the centers resonate, and laying out a divisible, homogeneous space
striated in all directions."

When a State, instead of being overcoded, identifies itself with its overcoding abstract machine it becomes totalitarian. When a State has as its purpose to overcode is totalitarian.

In the other ṕole there is an abstract machine of mutation: a machine that decodes and deterritorialises. "It is what
draws the lines of flight: it steers the quantum flows, assures the connec-
tion-creation of flows, and emits new quanta. It itself is in a state of flight,
and erects war machines on its lines."

What is a center or focal point of power?
"Thus centralization is always hierarchical, but hierarchy is always segmentary."
But centres of power are also molecular.
"This is the third aspect of power centers, or their limit. For the
only purpose these centers have is to translate as best they can flow quanta
into line segments (only segments are totalizable, in one way or another)."

-----------
Dangers:

"The study of the dangers of each line is the object of
pragmatics or schizoanalysis"

Schizoanalysis draws lines and makes maps.

"According to Nietzsche's
Zarathustra and Castaneda's Indian Don Juan, there are three or even four
dangers: first, Fear, then Clarity, then Power, and finally the great Disgust,
the longing to kill and to die, the Passion for abolition."

Fear: we are always afraid of loosing our great molar organisation.

The issue with clarity is molecular and has to do with filling the holes that solid segmentation produces: 
"That is precisely what clarity is: the distinctions that
appear in what used to seem full, the holes in what used to be compact; and
conversely, where just before we saw end points of clear-cut segments, now
there are indistinct fringes, encroachments, overlappings, migrations, acts
of segmentation that no longer coincide with the rigid segmentarity."

The danger here is to reproduce in smaller scales the molar structures and segments that do not belong into that scale. A commune escaping capitalism ends up reproducing structures of autgority and hierarchy within it.

This is perfect to understand how microfascism comes to be:
"But above all, supple segmentarity brings dangers of its own that do not merely reproduce
in small scale the dangers of molar segmentarity, which do not derive from
them or compensate for them. As we have seen, microfascisms have a spe-
cificity of their own that can crystallize into a macro fascism, but may also
float along the supple line on their own account and suffuse every little cell.
A multitude of black holes may very well not become centralized, and acts
instead as viruses adapting to the most varied situations, sinking voids in
molecular perceptions and semiotics. Interactions without resonance.
Instead of the great paranoid fear, we are trapped in a thousand little mono-
manias, self-evident truths, and clarities that gush from every black hole
and no longer form a system, but are only rumble and buzz, blinding lights
giving any and everybody the mission of self-appointed judge, dispenser of
justice, policeman, neighborhood SS man. We have overcome fear, we have
sailed from the shores of security, only to enter a system that is no less
concentricized, no less organized: the system of petty insecurities that
leads everyone to their own black hole in which to turn dangerous, possess-
ing a clarity on their situation, role, and mission even more disturbing than
the certitudes of the first line."


Power, the third danger is in both lines simultaneously:

"The man of power will always want to stop the
lines of flight, and to this end to trap and stabilize the mutation machine in
the overcoding machine. But he can do so only by creating a void, in other
words, by first stabilizing the overcoding machine itself by containing it
within the local assemblage charged with effectuating it, in short, by giving
the assemblage the dimensions of the machine. This is what takes place in
the artificial conditions of totalitarianism or the "closed vessel.""


Trap the decoding mahcine in the overcoding machime. So this turns the whole machine into that weird machine that overcodes decoding.

Lines of flight in themselves have a very particular danger:
"This, precisely, is the fourth danger: the
line of flight crossing the wall, getting out of the black holes, but instead of
connecting with other lines and each time augmenting its valence, turning
to destruction, abolition pure and simple, the passion of abolition. Like
Kleist's line of flight, and the strange war he wages; like suicide, double sui-
cide, a way out that turns the line of flight into a line of death."

Turning the line of flight into a line of death. This is what the treatise on nomadology explains about war-machines:

There are many reasons to believe that the war machine is of a different ori-
gin, is a different assemblage, than the State apparatus. It is of nomadic ori-
gin and is directed against the State apparatus. One of the fundamental
problems of the State is to appropriate this war machine that is foreign to it
and make it a piece in its apparatus, in the form of a stable military institu-
tion; and the State has always encountered major difficulties in this. It is
precisely when the war machine has reached the point that it has no other
object but war, it is when it substitutes destruction for mutation, that it
frees the most catastrophic charge. Mutation is in no way a transformation
of war; on the contrary, war is like the fall or failure of mutation, the only
object left for the war machine after it has lost its power to change. War, it
must be said, is only the abominable residue of the war machine, either
after it has allowed itself to be appropriated by the State apparatus, or even
worse, has constructed itself a State apparatus capable only of destruction.
When this happens, the war machine no longer draws mutant lines of
flight, but a pure, cold line of abolition. (Later, we will propose a theory of
the complex relation between the war machine and war.) 31


When the state appropiates an abstract machine that is nomadic in origin (war-machine) in the form of a military unit. War happens when the agent of mutation is not allowed to change. When mutation fails war is the catastrophic consequence of it. 

Either when the State appropiates a war-machine with this characteristics or even worst, when the war-machine has constructed to itself a State only capable of destruction.

This is where the paradox of Fascism gets interesting.

Totalitarianism is a molar issue, it is a State affair.

"Totalitarianism is quintessentially conservative. Fascism, on the other hand, involves a war
machine."


Fascism is not a State Army taking power, but a war-machine building its own state aparatus that can only destroy. Fascism is suicidal.

Fascism is a realised nihilism. (Think about the joker, the joker is fascism)

In fascism war eats up all the economy, isntead of growth of consumption you have an engagement of war as an economic activity.

"It was this reversion of the line of
flight into a line of destruction that already animated the molecular
focuses of fascism, and made them interact in a war machine instead of res-
onating in a State apparatus. A war machine that no longer had anything
but war as its object and would rather annihilate its own servants than stop
the destruction. All the dangers of the other lines pale by comparison."













































