Reading: On totalitarian interactivity

Author: Lev Manovich

Units: 1, Zone:network technology

Bibliography:Manovich, L., 1996. On totalitarian interactivity. Posting on www. rhizome. com. Retrieved May,
25, p.2008.

Links:http://manovich.net/index.php/projects/on-totalitarian-interactivity


Notes:

The experiences of East and West structure how new media is seen in both places. For the West, interactivity is a perfect vehicle for the ideas of democracy and equality. For the East, it is another form of manipulation, in which the artist uses advanced technology to impose his / her totalitarian will on the people. (On modern artist as a totalitarian ruler see the works of Boris Groys.)

Western media artists usually take technology absolutely seriously and despair when it does not work. Post-communist artists, on the other hand, recognize that the nature of technology is that it does not work, will always breakdown, will never work as it is supposed to... (For instance, Moscow conceptual artist and poet Dimity Prigov did an event during ISEA '94 in which he used business translation programs to translate a famous nineteenth Russian poem by Pushkin from Russian into Finnish and then from Finnish into English; he declared the mistakes in translation a new work of art.)

A Western artist sees Internet as a perfect tool to break down all hierarchies and bring the art to the people (while in reality more often than not using it as a super-media to promote his / her name ).

In contrast, as a post-communist subject, I cannot but see Internet as a communal apartment of Stalin era: no privacy, everybody spies on everybody else, always present line for common areas such as the toilet or the kitchen. Or I can think of it as a giant garbage site for the information society, with everybody dumping their used products of intellectual labor and nobody cleaning up. Or as a new, Mass Panopticum (which was already realized in communist societies) - complete transparency, everybody can track everybody else.


---------------------------

On interactive installations. People follows the little options given by the artist. This is framed as manipulation.

This can only operate if the newest technology is used to seduce people.

¿representation -> manipulation?

Interactive installation:: an advanced form of audience manipulation!

"For the West, interactivity is a perfect vehicle for the ideas of democracy and equality. For the East, it is another form of manipulation, in which the artist uses advanced technology to impose his / her totalitarian will on the people."

Very different attitudes towards technology: in the west the thing should work in the East the thing might work.


Internet for westerners: a place to make your name circulate / easterners: a place with no privacy

Manovich looking into the immediate future:
"Mass  Panopticum (which was already realized in communist societies) -- complete transparency, everybody can track everybody else."

How the experiences of Eastern Europe can be seen as the future of the integrated global capitalism sphere

But all art forms ever require the spectator to fill in the missing pieces of information.

But is interactive media a way to "externalise" the internal processes of thought creation?

But

"Thus we are asked to follow pre-programmed, objectively existing associations. In short, in what can be read as a new updated version of Althusser's "interpolation[sic]," we are  asked to mistake the structure of somebody's else mind for our own."


He means interpellation.






































