Reading: Repeating

Author: Jacques Attali

Units: 1.5333333333333, Zone:sound studies

Bibliography:Attali, Jaques. 1985.Repeating Chapter 4in Noise: The Political Economy of Music. University of Minnesota Press pp. 87-132

Links:https://monoskop.org/images/6/67/Attali_Jacques_Noise_The_Political_Economy_of_Music.pdf


Notes:

Repeating refers to recording sounds.

Relevance: one of the three powers: causing famine, causing war and recording sound.

Recordings: Means for social control.Stockpiling memory, retailing history and time...


Recording and reproducing means to control the silences and repetitions that people is exposed to.

Recording firstly a political auxiliary of representation.
But then it aided to perpetuatemusic... the age of mass reproduction was born (begibing of 20 c.)

"Music became an industry, and its consumption ceased to be collective. The
hit parade, show business, the star system invade our daily lives and completely
transform the status of musicians. Music announces the entry of the sign into
the general economy and the conditions for the shattering of representation."

"more than ever music becomes a monologue and a material object to exchange"

So... commodification of music.

Differently to representation, repetition is ubiquitous or at least very difficult to locate.

"The emergence of recording and stockpiling revolutionizes both music and
power; it overturns all economic relations."in

"order to accumulate profit, it becomes necessary to sell stockpileable sign pro-
duction, not simply its spectacle. This mutation would profoundly transform
every individual's relation to music."

But the process of repetition is merely a pale shadow of what the actual musical experience might be

Thus

"Thus the growth of exchange is accompanied by the almost total disappearance of the ini-
tial usage of the exchanged. Reproduction, in a certain sense, is the death of the
original, the triumph of the copy, and the forgetting of the represented founda-
tion: in mass production, the mold has almost no importance or value in itself"


Reproduction tech was born as a way to preserve old forms of representation rather than becoming a whole new economy 

"Pewer is incorporated into the very process of the selection of repeatable
molds."

Power becomes much more difuse.

Music offers insight about how poer relations work in the age of reproduction/repetition

--- the emplacement of recording-- new section

--freezing speech


History:   Two french projects of "automatic stenography" appeared before Edison's. Both failed to relate properly with the idea and system of representation.

These experiemnts failed because: "Representation
sufficed to regulate the imaginary in the channelization of violence."

Edison' s invention was a:

"stenographic machine for the reproduction of speech,
for recording discourse, the purpose of which was to stabilize representation
rather than to multiply it"

Pay attention to this: stabilise representation rather than multiply it. <- Edison registered this invention in 1877!!!!

Instead of preserving the phonograph became: "a channelization of the discourse of power, a recording of representation, of the
boss's orders"

Until 1910 it could only register speech, it was until 1914 that Beethoven' s 5th was recorded.


"music, a flexible code, was
dreamed of as an instrument of world unification, the language of all the mighty."

"The idea of a language coded in music
is linked to the idea of military order and imperial universality."


Edison opposed the use of the phonograph to record music (and display it in jukeboxes in drugstores); he did not want to have his invention confused with a toy.

So the positive view of the phonograph for music distribution was gradually acquired. Not immediate nor easy.

Conservative reactions: "more pleasure with a little effort", etc etc

The "final technical form" of such technology would have to come after the great deppression, ww2...

"The phonograph, then, is part of a radically new social and cultural space
demolishing the earlier economic constructions of representation"

Why are there two different speeds of reproduction in phonographs?

"A major modification of the
repeated object would be enough to make the reproduction device obsolete, and
vice versa; prudence in innovation becomes necessary, and the economic pro-
cess loses its fluidity."

"This duality is, as we
will see, characteristic of the economy of repetition and is responsible for retard-
ing its evolution."


So capitalism also slows than "progress". In other words, capitalism accelerates and deaccelerates technological innovation depending on its ability to generate capital circulation and surplus value. 

People that were in the logic of representation:
"The authors said nothing at first, thinking that radio broadcasts gave them
good pUblicity. But later, they began to fear that the public would lose interest
in performance halls and that record sales would fall as public broadcast cut into
private consumption."


First copyright issues emerge. Radio stations were able to reproduce the recordings freely...

new section--
--exchange object and use object

"Can a phonograph cylinder be considered a "publication" protected as such under law? 
In other words, does sound recording entail a right for the person whose work is recorded? 
What share of the exchange-value of the recording should go to the creator?"

The law to reproduce score music in mechanical musical instruments favoured the industrialist and not the musicians.

"The manufacture and sale of instruments
serving mechanically to reproduce copyrighted musical tunes do not constitute
musical plagiarism as envisioned under the law of July 19, 1793, in combination
with articles 425ff. of the Penal Code."

About a 1905 veredict on reproduction/representation:

"it equates the record with the score. Written reproduc-
tion determines the record's exchange-value and justifies the application of
copyright legislation."


"In effect, repetition poses the
same problems as representation: rent presupposes a right to industrial produc-
tion, in other words, a right to monitor the number of pressings and number of
copies sold, to which the royalties are proportional."


The author's associations thus played a decisive role in determing the rela-
tions between music and radio.

This is very relevant;

"today it has become possible for each lis-
tener to record a radio-broadcast representation on his own, and to manufacture
in this way, using his own labor, a repeatable recording, the use-value of which
is a priori equivalent to that of the commodity-object, without, however, having
its exchange-value."

Here the use-value is being reproduced without its exchange value.

The author writes from this: "This is an extremely dangerous process for the music indus-
try and for the authors, since it provides free access to the recording and its repe-
tition."

Thus, for the music industry is fundamental to "sup-
press information in order to create an artificial scarcity of music."


If this keeps going: "that authors' compensation will no longer be possible except at a fixed rate, on
a statistical and anonymous basis independent of the success of the work itself."

"It gains avail-
ability. It loses its festive and religious character as a simulacrum of sacrifice.
It ceases to be a unique, exceptional event, heard once by a minority. The sacri-
ficial relation becomes individualized, and people buy the individualized use of
order, the personalized simulacrum of sacrifice."

Music becomes a type of symbolic exchange...

"Music has thus become a strategic consumption, an essential mode of social-
ity for all those who feel themselves powerless before the monologue of the great
institutions."

"The use-value of the repeated object is thus the expression of lacks and ma-
nipulations in the political economy of the sign. Its exchange-value, approxi-
mately equal today for every work and every performer, has become disengaged
from use-value."

So the sign that music has become is a way of marking status/hierarchy/etc and has nothing to do with the use value of music (the ritual, the unique experience, etc). 

**** exhcange value has become disengage from the use-value. Like a financialization of music.


--new section
Exhchange time use-time


Repetition makes the stockpiling of time possible.

"People buy more records than they can lis-
ten to. They stockpile what they want to find the time to hear."

So "Use-time and
exchange-time destroy one another."

-- section
-- double repetition:

The music being repited the most (the ones that can be used since not consume a lot of the user's time) are the ones that are most repetitive.

Repetition creates repetitive music.


-- mass repetition the absence of meaning:

What is foreseen in the music industry about future political economy?

- the production of demand, not the production of supply

So we go to:

--producing the market from jazz to rock

OJO:*****
"Music did not really become a commodity until a broad market for popular
music was created. Such a market did not exist when Edison invented the phono-
graph; it was produced by the colonization of black music by the American in-
dustrial apparatus."

A music of revolt turned into commodity

About jazz:
"A music of the body, played and composed by all, jazz ex-
pressed the alienation of blacks. Whites would steal from them this creativity
born of labor and the elementary forms of industrialization, and then tum around
and sell it back"

Boomers were a big market of whities that demanded music different from past eras.

The commodification of jazz and later of rock would make sense in the context of the boomer generation.

About rock:

The end of the postwar econ crisis:

"coincident with the intro-
duction of a syncretic product ready to respond to that demand by using black
despair-carefully filtered-to express young white hopes: rock."


Censorship also played a fundamental roll in repetition media music:

"Thus a degraded, censored, artificial music took center stage. Mass music for
an anesthetized market."

--The production of supply

In repetition settings the musician is just another link in the chain of production. many decisions of productiona re made by technique-oritented people (producers, sound-engineers)

Further:

"Representation communicated an
energy. Repetition produces information free of noise. The production of repeti-
tion requires a new kind of performer, a virtuoso of the short phrase capable
of infinitely redoing takes that are perfectible with sound effects."



Differentiation in this market is ranked. Like in the HIT PARADE. 

--Banalization of the Message (content)

"The rhythms, of exceptional banality, are often not all
that different from military rhythms."

"To judge by its themes, neither musically
nor semantically does pop music announce a world of change."

"it heralds a new subversion by musicians cramped by censorship, who stand
alone in announcing change."

--The confinement of the youth

"the repetitive economy is first and foremost a
process for channelization of childhood."

The music, produced by adults, but marketed for youth creates group uniformity. Difference is not individualised.
 

"It creates a system
of apolitical, nonconflictual, idealized values. It is here that the child learns his
trade as a consumer, for the selection and purchase of music are his principal
activities. One might say that this is the child's labor, his contribution to produc-
tion: an upside-down world in which the child produces the consumption of
music while industry produces the demand for it. The production of supply be-
comes secondary and, with it, musicians."

"Therefore mass music heralds the death of the family: when it seems to serve the inter-
ests of commodity society to make the child a direct employee of the State, or
to send him out into the job market at the age of twelve to guarantee him a mini-
mal salary and to make him solvent, repetitive society will doubtless be skillful
enough to make claims of progress for this new linkup."


"What counts now is the difference
of the group as a whole from what it was the day before, and no longer differ-
ences within the group."

--background noise

Music functions as an agent of cultural homogeneization.

Promotes the dissapearance of distinctive cultures.

This pop music has subtituted background noise.

Mozart and Haydn were background noise for powerful people.

Repetitive music are background noise for the masses.

Music for silencing.

Is cage arriving to the negation of meaning in music observing repetitive market-oriented music?


--Repetition and the Destruction of Meaning <- this section refers to composition and avant-garde rather than pop music

***************** 
"the absence of meaning is the necessary condition for the legitimacy of a technocracy's power."

Acoustics to try to find out a mode of production for music.


"Music is unified with the sciences in thought. Thus, there is no break between
the sciences and the arts . . . . Henceforth, a musician should be a manufac-
turer of philosophical theses and global systems of architecture, of combinations
of structures (forms) and different kinds of sound matter" (Xenakis). <- <3 <3 <3

A music that parallels the paths and trajectories to science emerges.

"Thus music voices the becoming of science in repe-
tition, and its difficulties. It is linked to an abstraction of the conditions of func-
tioning of the society taking root, of the difficulties of a science of repetition."

Beyond scientism: Imperial Universalism:

"for meaninglessness is the only possible meaning in repetition without a
project."

In order to be universal, it diminishes its specificity, reduces the syntax of its codes. It does not create mean-
ing: for meaninglessness is the only possible meaning in repetition without a project.

Imperial music is the music that desires to be a totality. Even to try to be a theoretical framework for anything else.

--Depersonalisation
Muisc that is decoded is depersonalised.

-- deconcentration and power in MUSIC:

*** this is very relevant for me. Deconcentration and decentralisation of powert ultimately hides other forms of organisation that reorganise power.

"All of music becomes organized around the simulacrum of
nonpower. Instead of the score and orchestra leader, improvisation is presented
as the form of composition. In fact, the most formal order, the most precise and
rigorous directing, are masked behind a system evocative of autonomy and
chance."

"The only freedom left is that of the synthe-
sizer: to combine preestablished programs. A simulacrum of self-management,
this form of interpretation is a foreshadowing of a new manipulation by power:
since the work lacks meaning, the interpreter has no autonomy whatsoever in
his actions; there is no operation of his that does not originate in the composer's
manipUlation of chance."

About freedom in music, the composer no longer imagines something and then looks for the tools to actualise it, he just manages the possibilities of a tool.

"An acoustician, a cybernetician, he is transcended by his own tools. This constitutes a radical inversion of the innovator and the machine: instruments no longer serve to produce the desired sound forms, conceived in thought before written down, but to monitor unexpected forms."


This is how live coders often operate: quasi alive.

"The composer becomes a kind of pilot pushing buttons. "121 He becomes the orga-
nizer (' 'program designer' ') of a fluid work: quasi-alive, quasi-organic, creating
its own signification through its history. A work no one except the composer
can perform, often for lack of instruments specially invented for it. Music, like
political economy-and once again far in advance of it-experiences the tran-
scending of men by their knowledge and tools: one no longer organizes the
growth of production, but instead only makes an effort to regulate an evolution
whose laws are not completely known (that of sound matter). One produces what
technology makes possible, instead of creating the technology for what one
wishes to produce.


The continues circulation of new codes impedes the stabilisation of any. The music imposes itself without wanting to meet the listeners demands.

"This is indeed the pure ideology of progress: value in itself, even if it destroys the use-value of com-
munication." <- Sara's criticism about usevalue being formed by the social needs of the context in which commodities circulate.

Atonalism: "a transnational
and transideological convergence around a shared loss of mastery over produc-
tion to a scientifically based abstraction. Around shared power founded on a
principle of nonideology."

"Even though the modern musician, because he is more abstract, gives the appearance of being more indepen-
dent of power and money than his predecessors, he is, quite the opposite, more
tightly tied in with the institutions of power than ever before."

"Hardly profitable economically, he is the producer
of a symbolism of power."

-- new section
The Linking of the Two Circulations: The Culmination

Radical avant-garde and pop music bvelong to the post-industrial sphere, they are apparently antagonist nevertheless they are two sides of the same coin.

-- The concerts of power

The concert hall is an instrument of power.<---- This is what might be different nowadays and in my analysis

Concert <- Central sight of representative society. Representation takes place in the concert hall.

"today. a concert audience judges more than it enjoys; music has
become a pretext for asserting one's cultivation, instead of a way of living it."

Spectator recognizes their own image and the legitimation of their own power

"The concert is then seen to be the place used by the elite to convince itself that
it is not as cold, inhuman, and conservative as it is accused of being."

-- The musician in power


WHO is the musician in power??????

The performer has gained power.

So the composer becomes: "His function is no longer to invent ways of communicating or
representing the world, but to be a model for replication, the mold within which
reproduction and repetition take shape."

Musicians like the beatles are more like models that produce trends. "Thus they continue to
play the eternal role of music: creating a form of sociality. But in repetition that
passes for identity, and no longer for difference: the scapegoat has become a
model."

Language becomes a mold, an element of radical identification. <- language gives identity. WHat does this mean in live coding?

"The process of replication func-
tions even in cases in which the intent is critical or the identification is made
with a nonconformist model; anticonformism creates a norm for replication, and
in repetition music is no longer anything more than a detour on the road to ideo-
logical normalization."


--The delocalization of power

The music no longer flows from popular to the elites. It is disseminated industrially in such a way that it homogenises all scenes in all cities. In all the big capitals of the world dance music sounds the same, inf act it is the same.

But the abstract musicians are hyberspecialised. No access for the middle and lower classes.


"As the technology of musical distribution changed, the deritualization of music accelerated, its
artificial role nearly disappeared, and, beyond its spectacle, a music of identity
took root."

"Music, violence, power are no longer
localized in institutions."

Music repeats the memory of other societies.

"it heralds the threat of the return of
the essential violence. Thus, from whichever direction we approach it, music in
our societies is tied to the threat of death."



---- Repetition Silence and the End of Sacrifice

-- repetition and silence

So mass production (extreme repetition) compels silence. A silent office a silence provoked by excessive noise, etc.

"Today, neither the musician nor the worker who produces the record on an auto-
matic machine have the time to experience the music."


Automatatization is bounded with this kind of silence.


"For with records, as with all mass production,
security takes precedence over freedom; one knows nothing will happen because
the entire future is already laid out in advance. Identity then creates a mimicry
of desires and thus rivalry; and once again repetition encounters death. Today's
return to violence is therefore not caused by an excessive will to difference, but
on the contrary by the mass production of mimetic rivalries and the absence of
anything serving to focus this violence toward a sublimating activity."


Here there are many ways to relate nowadays landscape of repetitive music and the rise and predominance of violence.

Absence of meaning is the possibility of all meanings!

----- circulation:

"By eliminating use-time after representation had eliminated exchange-time, repetition made possible an explosive growth in production: that growth would have been unthinkable if people had to take the time to negotiate a price when they bought an object that was up for sale, and it would have been quickly impeded if they had to content themselves with producing services at the rate they are consumed."


Production goes much faster than  the ability of consumers to digest.

Hence stockpiling, one buys more albums that one can actually enjoy (or more likely, fully enjoy). This process is valorised more than the process of "ritualised listening"


"Repetition becomes pleasurable in the same way music becomes repeti-
tive: by hypnotic effect. Today's youth is perhaps in the process of experiencing
this fabulous and ultimate channelization of desires: in a society in which power
is so abstract that it can no longer be seized, in which the worst threat people
feel is solitude and not alienation, conformity to the norm becomes the pleasure
of belonging, and the acceptance of powerlessness takes root in the comfort of
repetition."

Denunciation of abnormal people is necessary.

Stockpiling death

The relationship of scapegoating, death and music has always been close.


"the stockpiling of use-time in the commodity object is fundamentally
a herald of death."

Transforming use-time into stockpile objects, without actually experiencing its function is a thrive towards death.

"Because death is visible, deafening, because violence is returning,
not only in war but in art, in other words, in knowledge, we refuse to take ac-
tion, to assume it, and to seek a strategy to oppose it."


Repetittive society:

On crisis (pay attention to thsi since crisis is the time of networks)

"Crisis is no longer a breakdown, a rupture, as in representation, but a de-
crease in the efficiency of the production of demand, an excess of repetition."


So crisis needs no revolutions but updates (as in CHun's temporality)

Crisis of proliferation***

Be aware of excessive circulation as the problem

The economy of repetition:

Mode of production changes from representation to the creation of molds (which allow mass production)

"Therefore, the necessary labor for production is no longer intrinsic in the nature
of the object, but a function of the number of objects produced. The information
included and transmitted thus plays the role of a stockpile of past labor, of
capital."

"Considerable labor must then be expended to give it a meaning, to produce a
demand for its repetition."


So an easy production but how about demmand?  captialist logic starts to concentrate in producing demand rather than supply.


So competition takes place in the creation of the molds or in the creation of demmand but not really in the production of the commodity.

"In this network, production is no longer the essential site of creation or com-
petition. Competition takes place earlier, in the creation of the molds, or later,
in the production of demand."

"The consumer dedicates a significant percentage of his time to selecting products
introduced almost haphazardly, the usage of which is very difficult to differen-
tiate, except by rankings determined by mysterious processes in which the con-
sumer is led to believe he participates through simulacra of voting."

"repetition requires the ongoing destruction of the use-value of earlier repetitions,
in other words, the rapid devaluation of past labor and therefore accelerated
growth."

"The only possible challenge to repetitive power takes the route of a breach
in social repetition and the control of noisemaking. In more day-to-day political
terms, it takes the route of the permanent affirmation of the right to be different,
an obstinate refusal of the stockpiling of use-time and exchange-time; it is the
conquest of the right to make noise, in other words, to create one's own code
and work, without advertising its goal in advance; it is the conquest of the right
to make the free and revocable choice to interlink with another's code-that is,
the right to compose one's life."
^^^a lot here that is just a call for determining ones own life but is this enough? 











































































