Reading: The refrain - A Thousand Plateaus

Author: Gilles Deleuze & Felix Guattari

Units: 1.2, Zone:theory

Bibliography:Deleuze, Gilles & Guattari, Félix. 1993. 'The refrain' in A Thousand Plateaus. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Links:


Notes:

OJO: Of the refrain is the title, not the refrain.


The refrain is primarily an idea retrieved from music!!!

Anything that draws a territory and develops territorial motifs. MOTIFS

“In  a  general  sense,  we  call  a  refrain  any  aggregate  of  matters  of  expression  that  draws  a  territory  and  develops  into  territorial  motifs  and  landscapes  (there  are  optical,  gestural,  motor,  etc.,  refrains)” (TP 323, emphasis in original)"

Assemblages aquire consistency through the refrain.

The refrain is the deterritorializing vector!!!  A line that does not connect two point but runs in the middle. A diagonal.

In western philosophy consistency is framed as the levels of similarity between a model of absolute truth (a platonic model) and its material form that relates to it. This is not the case in DnG.

What changes is always the model and the material expresion.

Paradoxes are necessary for the production of meaning!!

The paradox of the refrain is related to the paradox of set theory: the whole set is part of th set itself? (the barber that cuts the hair of a group of people can be considered as part of that set or not? The hairdresser is paradoxically inside and outside that set. So it is the refrain.

---------------------------------------------------------------

What is a milieu? it is not a territory (but it can acquire such status if it obtains consistency). A milieu is the positive definition of the non-territory (non-territory is in itself a negative definition). When a component (maybe a refrain) is periodically repeated (rhythmically) then there is a chance that a milieu is forming. Milieus are a kind of orientation.

"Every mileu is vibratory" "Every mileu is coded"  == Periodic repetition. But every code is in perpetual transduction.

Periodic repetition: Rhythm!!!!  <- this is relevant.

The rhythm codes the variables.

"Thus the living thing has an
exterior milieu of materials, an interior milieu of composing ele-
ments and composed substances, and intermediary milieu of mem-
branes and limits, and an annexed milieu of energy sources and action-perception"


Here a distinction between rhythm and meter becomes necessary: "Meter is dogmatic, but rhythm is critical;"

"Meter, whether regular or not, assumes a
coded form whose unit of measure may vary, but in a noncommunicating
milieu, whereas rhythm is the Unequal or the Incommensurable that is
always undergoing transcoding"

A rhythm transcodes and always produces difference. A metre only codes. 

How can one proclaim the constituent
inequality of rhythm while at the same time admitting implied vibrations,
periodic repetitions of components? A milieu does in fact exist by virtue of
a periodic repetition, but one whose only effect is to produce a difference
by which the milieu passes into another milieu. It is the difference that is
rhythmic, not the repetition, which nevertheless produces it: productive
repetition has nothing to do with reproductive meter. This is the "critical
solution of the antinomy."


The wasp and the orchid are a good example fo transcoding.

Milieus, when territorialised, become components of a territory.
Milieus and rhythms, when territorialised, become territories.



When a component (a milieu) ceases to be directional (functional) and starts to be dimensional (expressive) then it becomes part of a territory. 

There is a territory when the rhythm becomes expressive rather than functional.
When a characteristic of a event or entity becomes metric (repeats itself periodically just to deliniate a space for the sake of it and not responding to a *function*) and stops being rhythm it is when a milieu becomes a territory.

Consistency (the refrain) de-emphasises geography and spatiality (as often consistency and territoriality is conceaved).

"Territorialization is an act of rhythm that has become
expressive, or of milieu components that have become qualitative."

When rhythms become expressive and/or melodies form we can perhaps talk about the emergence of proper qualities. ***********

What is the position of art in all this? Well, the emergence of qualities can be associated with art:
"That would make the territory a result of art. The artist: the first person to set out a boundary
stone, or to make a mark. Property, collective or individual, is derived from
that even when it is in the service of war and oppression. Property is funda-
mentally artistic because art is fundamentally poster, placard."

"The refrain is
rhythm and melody that have been territorialized because they have
become expressive—and have become expressive because they are
territorializing."

Expressiveness is not emotion or subjective impressions. Expression finds an objectivity in the territory.

Territorial motifs and territorial counterpoints.
"In truth, territorial motifs and counterpoints
explore potentialities of the interior or exterior milieu. Ethologists have
grouped these phenomena under the concept of "ritualization" and have
demonstrated the link between animal rituals and territory. But this word
is not necessarily appropriate for these nonpulsed motifs and nonlocalized
counterpoints, since it accounts for neither their variability nor their fixity.
It is not one or the other, fixity or variability; certain motifs or points are
fixed only if others are variable, or else they are fixed on one occasion and
variable on another."

"We should say, rather, that territorial motifs form rhythmic faces or char-
acters, and that territorial counterpoints form melodic landscapes."

More on art and style:
"The discovery of the properly melodic landscape and
the properly rhythmic character marks the moment of art when it ceases to
be a silent painting on a signboard. This may not be art's last word, but art
went that route, as did the bird: motifs and counterpoints that form an
autodevelopment, in other words, a style."

"Critical distance is not a meter, it is a rhythm. But the rhythm, precisely, is caught up in
a becoming that sweeps up the distances between characters, making them
rhythmic characters that are themselves more or less distant, more or less
combinable (intervals)."


Deleuze and Guattari undermine the political and geographical emphasis of consistency by using the refrain.

The refrain is a matter of orientation (milieus). WHen a little child sings to prevent darkness from engulfing them is orienting themselve into the sound (the refrain). Such refrain refers not to a spatial location but to something that can keep darkness and chaos away: A soothing and stabilising centre, a rhythm.


Here sound becomes a component that can refer to home.****

The refrain (home) is to form from the chaos something that is centred and stable. A rhythm that emerges from the chaos of random noise perhaps.

New milieus can be formed all the time. When a child moves away from home new sounds are combined with the familiar ones forming new milieus.

The point is to always be creating new rhythms.*********************

Rhythms guards us from chaos. Such rhythms are then "selected" (or aspects of them at least) to form the new. The future gets instantiated in this way. 

So, what are the three vignettes here?

As always these three aspects of the refrain appear simultaneously rathert than linearly.

"III. Finally, one opens the circle a crack, opens it all the way, lets some
one in, calls someone, or else goes out oneself, launches forth. One opens
the circle not on the side where the old forces of chaos press against it but in
another region, one created by the circle itself. As though the circle tended
on its own to open onto a future, as a function of the working forces it shel
ters. This time, it is in order to join with the forces of the future, cosmic
forces."


The refrain seats in the middle of chaotic, terrestrial and "cosmic" forces. The tendencies of the refrain (as an assemblage) are that of stability and that of change.

So a ben diagram: chaos (the unformed), cosmos (the new), earth (the familiar)

Extracting from the chaotic energy of the universe to create something new (which is also grounded to the familiar).

"Sometimes one goes from chaos to
the threshold of a territorial assemblage: directional components,
infra-assemblage. Sometimes one organizes the assemblage: dimensional
components, intra-assemblage. Sometimes one leaves the territorial
assemblage for other assemblages, or for somewhere else entirely:
interassem-blage, components of passage or even escape. And all three at
once."


(accoridng to Adkins)
Assemblages have three components:

infra-assemblages: the mileus and the rhythm. Rhythm is located between milieus, as a haeccity, in the in-betweens.

intra-assemblages: The territory: the product of the mileus and rhythms. A territory has two purposes: a reorganization of
functions and a regrouping of forces.

A rhythm “becomes expressive . . . when it acquires temporal con-
stancy and a spatial range that makes it a territorial, or rather ter-
ritorializing, mark: a signature”

When the function is subordinated to the territory****

Specialization/professionalisation is a territorial function and it forms intra-assemblages.

"the territory separates the interior forces
of the earth from the exterior forces of chaos, the same does not occur in
"intension," in the dimension of depth, where the two types of force clasp
and are wed in a battle whose only criterion and stakes is the earth"

"Territorializing marks simultaneously develop into
motifs and counterpoints, and reorganize functions and regroup forces. But
by virtue of this, the territory already unleashes something that will surpass
it."

********* This is very relevant: All territories produce an excess, something that goes beyond it.




Refrains trace constellations out of chaos, such arrangements protect us from chaos also. Its a membrane somehow, it filters in the outside but keeps the outside out.

Accoridng to Adkins:

Territorialising marks create consistency in 4 ways:
1) it develops motifs (rhythmic faces); 
2) it develops counterpoints (melodic landscapes); 
3) it reorganizes functions; and 
4) it regroups forces.


A mahcine is a joint, it opens assemblages to other assemblages.

Summary from Adkins:
The child’s song in
the first vignette is the move from chaos to milieu. The second
vignette is the move from milieu to territory that establishes an
intense center that is both a selection and protection from chaos.
The intense center of home, earth, the natal forms both the inte-
rior and the exterior of the territory. It is the deterritorializing
edge. The deterritorializing edge is the opening that concerns
the third vignette.


Consistency is the result of self-organising assemblages.

Consistency is the becoming expressive of rhythms.

From Adkins:
"Deleuze and Guattari do not see
their task as one of sorting assemblages into “good” rhizomatic
assemblages and “bad” arborescent assemblages. Rhizome and tree,
consistency and organization, change and stasis—all of these oppo-
sitions are the two opposed limits of any assemblage. Perceptual
semiotics consists in seeing the ways in which different assemblages
construct and map out this opposition."


THIS:
Here, Time is not an a priori form; rather, the refrain is
the a priori form of time, which in each case fabricates different times
[temps: also, "meters," "tempos"—Trans.].


The milieus all have their own codes and they are perpetually transcoding between milieus. The territories are different to codes, it seems to form from decoding.

The code forms whatever defines a specie, but how is it that we can distinguish betwen individuals of such sepcies? 
"It is because there is a disjunction between the territory
and the code that the territory can indirectly induce new species. Wherever
territoriality appears, it establishes an intraspecific critical distance
between members of the same species; it is by virtue of its own disjunction
in relation to specific differences that it becomes an oblique, indirect means
of differentiation."

"From all of these standpoints, decoding appears as the
"negative" of the territory, and the most obvious distinction between terri-
torial animals and nonterritorial animals is that the former are much less
coded than the latter."

So the repetition of difference meqans this. You have a lot of iterations of the same that have an excess that cannot be coded. That excess allows to diferentiates members of the same species. The  negative of the territory (the species the coded) is the decoding. 

Between milieus transcoding happens. In a territory (in relationship with the milieus that form it) decoding happens (some remanent code escapes the territory always, avoids being coded).


Infra-assemblages - Posters and placards
Intra-assemblages - Melody and counterpoint

"we call a refrain any aggregate of matters
of expression that draws a territory and develops into territorial motifs and
landscapes (there are optical, gestural, motor, etc., refrains)"

any composition or organisation of matter that is expressive and describes a territory is a refrain. This should develop identiti motifs and landscapes. A bunch of signifiers that refer to the territory.

OJO: From the internet (file:///home/alejandro/Downloads/2018thorntonephd.pdf)

"Simply put, it is possible to define three different kinds of lines in an assemblage that relate to the three stages of the refrain outlined above. First, we go “from chaos to the threshold of a territorial assemblage” by way of lines that run between pure repetitions of difference. These lines are called “infra-assemblage” lines because they exist ‘below’ the assemblage. Then one “organizes the assemblage” via the use of “intra-assemblage” lines which determine an interior and separate it from an exterior. Finally, “one leaves the territorial assemblage for other assemblages” by way of “inter-assemblage” lines, which are passages of “escape”.544 This final set of lines that escape the assemblage are what Deleuze and Guattari will call lines of flight."

So it is like a recursive structure. But the intra-assemblage is where many partiuclar things are territorialised. For example sexuality. We define what are the "correct" forms of sexuality given the territorial assemblage in which we are. However the definitions of sexuality given by such territory contain the potency to become a "line of deterritorialization".

Anything that gets territorialised (in the level of the intra-assemblage) can become a minimal unti for deterritorialisation and formation of other assemblages.


This is beautiful and resonates with the nancarrow research:
"This ambiguity between the territory
and deterritorialization is the ambiguity of the Natal. It is understood
much more clearly if it is borne in mind that the territory has an intense
center at its profoundest depths; but as we have seen, this intense center
can be located outside the territory, at the point of convergence of very
different and very distant territories."

This centre (the natal) traces a movement that goes beyond the inter-assemblage. The movement towards such centre (that is always outside in the distance) is the movement towards the cosmic. In such movements there is no longer rhythm or milieus but precise localisation in a cosmic scale.

"These are no longer territorialized forces bundled together
as forces of the earth; they are the liberated or regained forces of a
deterritorialized Cosmos"

************---------- good summary --------------------------------------

Refrains could accordingly be classified as follows: (1) territorial
refrains that seek, mark, assemble a territory; (2) territorialized function
refrains that assume a special function in the assemblage (the Lullaby that
territorializes the child's slumber, the Lover's Refrain that territorializes
the sexuality of the loved one, the Professional Refrain that territorializes
trades and occupations, the Merchant Refrain that territorializes distribu-
tion and products); (3) the same, when they mark new assemblages, pass
into new assemblages by means of deterritorialization-reterritorialization
(nursery rhymes are a very complicated example: they are territorial
refrains that are sung differently from neighborhood to neighborhood,
sometimes from one street to the next; they distribute game roles and func-
tions within the territorial assemblage; but they also cause the territory to
pass into the game assemblage, which tends to become autonomous); 27 (4)
refrains that collect or gather forces, either at the heart of the territory, or in
order to go outside it (these are refrains of confrontation or departure that
sometimes bring on a movement of absolute deterritorialization:
"Goodbye, I'm leaving and I won't look back." At infinity, these refrains
must rejoin the songs of the Molecules, the newborn wailing of the funda-
mental Elements, as Millikan put it. They cease to be terrestrial, becoming
cosmic: when the religious Nome blooms and dissolves in a molecular pan-
theist Cosmos, when the singing of the birds is replaced by combinations of
water, wind, clouds, and fog. "Outside, the wind and the rain ..." The Cos-
mos as an immense deterritorialized refrain).


********--------------------------------------------


But how to produce a non-arborescent explanation of consistency?

What refrains manage to do is provided a way to understand consistency without recurring to hierarchies or arborescent structures.

Consistency -> consolidation.

From an exteriority to an interiority, not from a centre to the exterior.

From a discrete fuzzy agregate to consolidation.

First, there is no begining.

"Second, and this is not a contradiction, there must be an
arrangement of intervals, a distribution of inequalities, such that it is
sometimes necessary to make a hole in order to consolidate."

Third: there is a "superposition of disparate rhythms" an articulation of interhythms rather than the imposition of a cadence or a metre.

"The territorial assemblage
is a milieu consolidation, a space-time consolidation, of coexistence and
succession. And the refrain operates with these three factors."

A question less about imitating rather than occupaying a given frequency spetrcum.

there are never mechanical relationships. Relationships are always machinic and machines are freed by deterritorialisation and plugged to new machines through that process.

"What we call machinic statements are
machine effects that define consistency or enter matters of expression."

Deterritorialization provokes new interassemblage connections, or an opening that goes to the cosmos or it gets trap in a "black hole" function.

Concerning such black holes:
"This is what happens under conditions of precocious or
extremely sudden deterritorialization, and when specific, interspecific,
and cosmic paths are blocked; the machine then produces "individual"
group effects spinning in circles,"

Remember again: the refrains are a matter of how does something acquire consistency. How can we individualise a process, event, etc?

A territory is bound to its own detterritorialisation and it is a decoding movement. WHich implies that there is surplus energy been produced by a territory all the time in these two different ways.

This is very important OJO *****
***
***
"In effect, what holds an assemblage together is not the play of framing forms or linear
causalities but, actually or potentially, its most deterritorialized compo-
nent, a cutting edge of deterritorialization."

"Just as milieus swing between
a stratum state and a movement of destratification, assemblages swing
between a territorial closure that tends to restratify them and a
deterrito-rializing movement that on the contrary connects them with the
Cosmos."

One form to another form requires transcoding. Transiting from one milieu to another.
"Each form is like the code of
a milieu, and the passage from one form to another is a veritable
transcoding."

The baroque is extremely chaotic, it is not previous to classicism, it is underneath it. It is the layer that classical musicians use to organise chaos. Basically, the baroque is too chaotic and the classical is the arrengment and organisation of such chaos.

Forms are the transcoding of such chaos. But the chaos is always there still. (in the classical period)

In romanticism, the artist is no longer selfindentified as a creator but as a transgressor. It defies creation. 

"The earth
has become that close embrace of all forces, those of the earth as well as of
other substances, so that the artist no longer confronts chaos, but hell and
the subterranean, the groundless. The artist no longer risks dissipation in
the milieus but rather sinking too deeply into the earth"


The romanitc pathos is related with the earth (the centre, the natal) and it is at the same time the territory, the lost territory and the earth vector (territorialisation, deterritorialisation and the line of flight)

"Matter itself was no longer a chaos to subjugate and organize but
rather the moving matter of a continuous variation."

"There was a new relation to danger, madness, limits: romanticism did not
go further than baroque classicism; it went elsewhere, with other givens
and other vectors."

The terriotiry is one alone and "the peoaple" belongs to the earth in romanticism (this refers to its universalising nature):

"It certainly cannot be said that there is more or
less nationalism on one side or the other because nationalism is everywhere
in the figures of romanticism, sometimes as the driving force, sometimes as
a black hole (fascism used Verdi much less than nazism did Wagner)."


Here, the problem of individuation emerges, there is a pole that tends towards the unversals, in which everybody has an homogeneous presence and where the earth claims ownership of the people. There is, in the other side the power of the crowds which keep their heterogeneity and reveal a different kind of individualisation: dividuals.

Universals: 
Wagner
Stockhausen

Dividuals:
Verdi
Berio

Both:
Berloiz, Musorgsky, ...


About the modern:


"If there is a modern age, it is, of course, the age of the cosmic."

*****************
"The assemblage no longer confronts the forces of chaos, it no longer uses the forces of the earth or the people to deepen itself
but instead opens onto the forces of the Cosmos."


"A material is a molecularized matter, which must accordingly "harness" forces; these forces are necessarily forces of the Cosmos."

The cosmic and the harnessing of the molecular and the forms that emerge from it attempts to render visible, audible, thinkable what is not visible, not audible and not thinkable.

It is about detterritorialisation, no earhtly forms emerge from modernism. It mostly captures and works in a molecular level:

"Matters of expression are superseded by
a material of capture."

Cosmic forces necesarily bring the molecular to the fore.

The great problem of modernity is consistency******************************
"The problem is no longer that of the beginning, any more than it is that of a
foundation-ground. It is now a problem of consistency or consolidation:
how to consolidate the material, make it consistent, so that it can harness
unthinkable, invisible, nonsonorous forces. Debussy ... Music
molecu-larizes sound matter and in so doing becomes capable of
harnessing nonsonorous forces such as Duration and Intensity. 51 Render
Duration sonorous."

Varese is very succesfull at atomizing musical matter at the same time that it acquires consistency.

The synthesiser provides many answers in to such problem: By modularly arrenging oscilators it is making sonorous the sounding process itself.

A description of Varese's music: "a musical machine of consistency, a sound machine (not a
machine for reproducing sounds), which molecularizes and atomizes,
ionizes sound matter, and harnesses a cosmic energy."

"We have to create machines not as technical reproduction devices but assemblages that can explore sound at a molecular level at the same time that such explorations acquire consistency"

"The claim is that one is opening music to all events, all irruptions, but one ends up reproduc-
ing a scrambling that prevents any event from happening."

"The sobriety of the assemblages is what makes
for the richness of the Machine's effects."

An event has to be deterritorialised enough but people have the tendency of reterritorialising as fast as possible (your music is only nosie, your painting can be drawn by a child)

"According to Varese, in order for the
projection to yield a highly complex form, in other words, a cosmic distri-
bution, what is necessary is a simple figure in motion and a plane that is
itself mobile; otherwise, you get sound effects."


Three characteristics of material in modern times:
 - It is molecularised matter.
 - It is defined by the functions which provide consistency
 - It abandoned the realtionship to the earth that romanticism established

In modernity the question becomes:
""To dwell as a poet or as an assassin?"" <- deleuze <- virilio


"the question has become: "To dwell as a poet or as an assassin?" 56 The assassin is one who bombards the existing
people with molecular populations that are forever closing all of the
assemblages, hurling them into an ever wider and deeper black hole. The
poet, on the other hand, is one who lets loose molecular populations in
hopes that this will sow the seeds of, or even engender, the people to
come, that these populations will pass into a people to come, open a
cosmos."

The modern artist has abandoned the solitude and the antagonism of the romantic artist and needs to engage with the people.

But the people is now lacking. since the modern artist is thriving towards the cosmos the people that is lacking are the "cosmis people". A people that can go beyond the romantic populist notions of State and art. 

For d n g these are not three "ages" but assemblages enveloping different machines.

"A freeing of the molecular was already found in
classical matters of content, operating by destratification, and in romantic
matters of expression, operating by decoding."

It is not a historic development but it is a rearrengement of perception.

"Becoming is like the machine: present in a different way in
every assemblage, passing from one to the other, opening one onto the
other, outside any fixed order or determined sequence."


*******OJO********** this clashes with the historic materialism of marx?

So, there are four kind of refrains:

The refrain of the milieus (the classical) a binary oposition of parts. a rhythmic movement from one milieu to antoher.
Out of the chaos acquiring rhythms.

The natal refrain, the refrain of the earth. In these refrains the territory is established. It elates the parts with the whole and it acts as a membrane that differentiates the outside from the inside.

The popular or folk refrains, which bring into relationship the national with affect.

The cosmic refrain: the refrain that orients the ear towards the cosmos.

So, why is the refrain sonorous?

"Sound owes this power not to signifying or
"communicational" values (which on the contrary presuppose that pow-
er), nor to physical properties (which would privilege light over sound),
but to a phylogenetic line, a machinic phylum that operates in sound and
makes it a cutting edge of deterritorialization." 

Is the non-hierarchical and non-linear traits of sound make it a more deterritorialising element?

Sound is not without risk as it is inmersive, it embraces us. But can throw us towards a line of flight towards the cosmos or a black hole towards fascism.

So what is the refrain?

It is a crystal, a prism: it decomposes things - it accelerate exchanges between heterogeneous assemblages / it is ambiguous

The refrain fabricates time: "Time is not an a priori form; rather, the refrain is
the a priori form of time, which in each case fabricates different times
[temps: also, "meters," "tempos"—Trans.]"

Musicicans "We go from assembled refrains
(territorial, popular, romantic, etc.) to the great cosmic machined refrain."

--------- schumann -----
What happens when you detterritorialise the refrain????

When such a task is at hand you can throw a line of flight towards the cosmos but this depends on the force already present in the refrain.

What can also happen is that you are thrown into a bloack hole and paralysis and madness overcomes.

The cosmic force contained in the molecular refrain can give an idea of how broader forces (act), the cosmic refrain is already contained in the particular ones. 






















































































































