Reading: The Southern Question

Author: Antonio Gramsci

Units: 1.5, Zone:theory

Bibliography:Gramsci, Antonio. 1926 [2005]. The Southern Question. Guernica Editions: Toronto-Buffalo-Lancaster

Links:https://monoskop.org/images/f/fa/Migone_Christof_Sonic_Somatic_Performances_of_the_Unsound_Body_2012.pdf


Notes:


Given the cultural differences between south (peasents) and north (proletariats) capital impedes alliances between subaltern groups. The North-south divide is recursive: it can be extrapolated to registers beyond the Italian nation (for example the industrious north in Mexico and the indigenous-central-american south or the barbaric México and the civilised US-Canada in North America).

How the question of subalternity plays down when working with an international ensemble?
How tokenism plays down in these kind of relations?

Creating a common culture (network music && live coding) can favour alliances between subaltern people without being separated by geography

// --------------------------------------------------------------

Te text proposes a series of political alliances that go beyond geographical difference (between an industrrialised North and an Agrarian South). The peasents of the south and the workers of the north are the two fundamental forces to secure a socialist future. It is in the best interest of proletariat and peasents for the proletariat to become the leading class, without the alliance with the south its unlikely since the South could become a stronghold for a capitalist counterrevolution.

This proposal differs from the status quo as portrayed by Grasmci: 

(Gramsci, 1926, p. 28)
"Northern bourgeoisie has subjugated the South of Italy and the Islands, and reduce them to exploitative colonies."

Gramsci points out that Italy has a problem of propaganda derived from the capitalist hegemony, such hegemony can be explained through the following cite:

(Gramsci, 1926, p. 32) 
"South is the ball and chain that prevents a more rapid progress in the civil development of Italy"

This implies that the South is underdeveloped not because of capitalist exploitation but because the ñazyness and barbarism inherent to peasent class and agrarian backwardness. This narrative can be maintained because of a particular structure of control in which "a clique of intellectuals" from the South maintain the legitimacy of the status quo. 

Gramsci critiques and identifies attitudes in working class, particularly from the North, that can be though of as an emotionally driven regionalism and craftmanship-belonging. 

(Gramsci, 1924, p. 41)
"The proletariat, in order to be able tp govern as a class, has to shed every residue of corporativism, every syndicalist prejudice or incrustation. [...] it is necessary, in order to win the trust and consensus of the peasents and of some semi-proletarian categories within the cities, to overcome certain prejudices and conquer certain forms of egoism which can and do subsist within the working class as such, even when craft particularism has vanished."


Syndicalist alliances between working class and the bourgeoisie (with the atsrategic alliance of the SOuthern intellectuals) will procure a privileged status to the workers but always as an appendage of capitalist class. Making it impossible to engender socialism.

Turin is an exmaple of alliance between "less skilled" and "more skilled" workers that enabled a class struggle dyanmic.

Fior Gramsci, this alliance can be extrapolated to the alliance between the Northern industrial workers and the Southern Agrarian worker (the peasant). 


Gramsci then analysiss the social composition of the South: Landowners and their intellectual allies, middle range bourgeoisie intellectuals (middle class) and a mass of peasants.

(Gramsci, 1924, pp. 61)
"Southern Italy is a great social disintegration"

He traces how the landonwers and their intellectuals centralised and dominate in its totality the whole complex of manifestations. The only goal of such structure (a mass of unorganised peasants, mediating middle-range intellectuals, and land owners) is to preserve the status quo.

He mentions the rol of emigrants (to the North and to America). These groups could finance a "silent revolution". Instead, captured by the state aparatus, become agents that would give the state the financial means by which it subsidized the "parasitic industries of the North" (Gramsci, 1924, p. 60).

Non-aligned intellectual activity of Southerners is found in Central and Northern Italy which ahs influenced many intellectuals conversations around class struggle. 

Gramsci identifies workers born under capitalist technique as in direct relationship with the Southern intellectuals that pose the southern question in a terrain different than the traditional vanguardism. There is a need to form intellectual groups oriented towards the revolutionary proletariat. The proletariat and the peasent class are articulated by such intellectual groups.

Proletarians need to break the agrarian bloc, the structure leaded by landowners and intellectuals, by favouring "autonomous and independent formations" of peasants and rural workers. In order to succeed is fundamental to break the southern intellectual bloc. 


Land to the peasents means that the peasents are the working class of agrarian social groups.

Which means that, similarly to the alliances between different skilled and unskilled worker categories, agrarian workers need to be considered.

Against nationalism/regionalism/syndicalism:
Northerners and Southerners understand thar regardless of georgaphical difference two social forces are necessary: peasents and proletariat. 


















