Reading: The Silent Network — The Music of Wandelweiser

Author: Douglas Barret

Units: 0.7, Zone:network music

Bibliography: G. Douglas Barrett (2011): The Silent Network — The Music of Wandelweiser, Contemporary Music Review, 30:6, 449-470

Links:


Notes:

This essay examines Wandelweiser as a unique social and artistic formation while
considering the social import of the group’s artistic works. Tracing Wandelweiser’s
history and analyzing a selection of its musical works, the group is considered in relation
to historical avant-garde movements and contemporary network theory. Though lacking
an official manifesto, Wandelweiser’s aesthetic program can be located largely in its
interpretations of John Cage’s silent composition 4 0 33 00 . Expressed in the various
interviews, writings, and musical works of Wandelweiser members, these readings of
Cage’s work—largely consonant with the consideration of ‘silence as an autonomous
musical phenomenon’—are contrasted with existing and original interpretations of 4 0 33 00
which underline its potential as a conceptual, discursive, and socially engaged musical
work.


---------------------------------------


Description of wandelweiser seems to be related with very quite and slow sounds which tends to blend with the environment outside of the "performance space".

Wolff says: The play very quitly with huge silences.

The group is into: 'the evaluation and integration of silence(s)[...]"

Edition Wandelweiser was born in 1992—the year of John Cage’s death.

Wandelweiser remains a ‘lively network of cooperations and affinities,
and friendships with all sorts of gradations, a kind of community that now has real
definition’

The collective is decentralised in many aspects. It also does not have a manifetso or a set of clear goals.

Wandelweiser is a social and artistic formation. *******

‘silence as an autonomous musical phenomenon’ (Beuger in
Warburton, 2001)

Before founding Edition Wandelweiser, Beuger and Schlothauer met as members of
the Aktionsanalytische Organisation, a radical commune started in 1970 and led by
Vienna Actionist artist Otto Mühl. In Mühl’s large-scale experimental art/life project,
also referred to as the Friedrichshof Commune, communal sex replaced monogamy,
group ownership replaced private property, and ‘Aktionsanalyse’ replaced psycho-
analysis.

Wandelweiser has two origins: one is a commune another is artistic endeavour.
The commune here feferred to acts as a totalitarian formation.

Liberating oneself from monogamy to embrace the totalitarian authority of (Otto) Mühl.

Fleck offers the work of French
poststructuralist philosophers Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari as an appropriate
context for analyzing the Mühl commune (pp. 156–157). However, while Deleuze
and Guattari (1987) pose their concept of the ‘rhizome’—a root structure that
‘connects any point to any other point’ (p. 21)—as a counter to the ‘arborescence’ of
totalitarianism, Fleck insists that creative freedom and, to an extent, hierarchical
mobility were in fact enjoyed by members of AAO


So the commune was arborescent, hierarchical and totalitarian, not a rhizome but the framework by DnG still works.

The commune lasted a lon time but it was disintegrated when the leader was held acountable of many offences (rape, abuse of authority, etc.)

"There were ongoing contradictions and antagonisms inherent to the
commune’s economic and political organization."

"For Fleck (2003), ‘the question remain[ed] as to how a
liberation movement turned into a dictatorial Gesamtkunstwerk’ (p. 255). According
to Beuger, it was because of AAO that he began Wandelweiser with the idea that a
community as such should not be rigidly defined."

The experience of the commune as a totalitarian organisation was the parting point of wandelweiser

Second origin is a silent music competition****************

"Manfred Werder notes a general aura present in Europe
at the time of Stille Musik in which the work of Feldman, Cage, and Wolff was
particularly influential"

Frey’s piece resonates with his later formulation of music as an ‘expanse’,
in which, ‘memory is shaped less by the individual details than by a situation in
which one has spent a certain period of time’


Remaining certain time in a music work is what makes audiences connect with it.


"The term network might be misleading if Wandelweiser is thought only in
terms of the works published by Edition Wandelweiser; yet the label seems
nonetheless appropriate in referring to the web of activity surrounding the group’s
writings, musical works and concert events. Unlike Mühl’s AAO, Wandelweiser are
not geographically bound; rather, they unite on specific aesthetic territory. While
successfully avoiding statements of intent, Wandelweiser have been nothing short of
prolific in interviews and their own publications."

The network is adecuate to describe the group's decentralised character. They share a specific aesthetic territory.

"Wandelweiser and Fluxus at the very least share in the uniqueness of their respective interpretations of the work of Cage. Chronological lag notwithstanding, we might think of Wandelweiser and Fluxus as parallel yet entirely distinct branches stemming from the crisis initiated by Cage and his famous silent work, 4 0 33 00"

One work can engendered different interpretations of it, as the different sollutions put forward by Wandelweiser which differ from the Fluxus interpretation of 4:33". 

Fluxus is apparently a vanguard, is Wandelweiser understood in the same vein?

For Peter Bürger, the avant-garde revolves around the question of
autonomy, art’s independence from society. 7 Bürger (1984) attempts to articulate the
complexity of the concept of autonomy: conceding to both art’s separation from
society (l’art pour l’art) as a given condition and the flat out denial of any separateness
art may have from society based on the ‘correct insight that autonomy is a historically
conditioned phenomenon’ at once misses the logical and historical ‘contradictoriness
inherent in the thing itself’ (pp. 35–36).

Wandelweiser is antagonistic to a mainstream. They are, maybe, autonomous to the art world.
There is a claim that either vanguardism or mtv music depend on overstimulating the audience.

"We’re surrounded by noises and sensory overstimulation
wherever we go. For me, the true avant-garde is the critical analysis or issue-taking
with our cultural surroundings. What’s needed is not faster, higher, stronger,
louder—I want to know about the lull in the storm."


4:33" by Cage is not the end but the begining.***** resonates with Nancarrow and the academics surrounding it that claim it to be the "last" unexplored territory of music.

4:33" turn to language, a crisis that has been opened; merely approached and by far not resolved. Partition between the score and the sound that has been not resolved.

An observation of the concert situation. The concert is a liminal territory in which the internal and external join.

Wandelweiser: a ‘network’ of indeterminate
agents, of ‘cooperations and affinities’, all of which work in tandem, conflict, and
collaboration. A truly valuable engagement with 4 0 33 00 might emerge out of the
consideration of this sort of confluence of elements—of 4 0 33 00 performances,
discourse, and criticism, 4 0 33 00 historical accounts, ‘post’-4 0 33 00 music, 4 0 33 00 offshoots,
parodies, and détournements—each thought as one interconnective node in a
synchronic field of meaning-space. Contingent as indeterminate silence, and with its
‘network’ of ever-shifting interpretive fluidity, 4 0 33 00 may be considered the anti-
autonomous artwork par excellence.


4:33" anti-autonomous artwork par excellence******


NOT exploring new sounds but exploring new relations to the sounding world.

Alan Badiou's cut. Compisiton here is not organising sound but making cuts in reality, allowing new perceptions to be.

For BEuger, his music is nmot a representation but a confrontation with reality.



Let us return to the problem of artistic autonomy framed as relating the poles of
art and life.

The relationship between life and art is totalising in vanguards:

For Bürger (1984), the critique of this tendency of the avant-
garde is clear: ‘An art no longer distinct from the praxis of life but wholly absorbed in
it will lose the capacity to criticize it, along with its distance’ (p. 50)



Vanguards cannot engage critically with themselves.

"Wandelweiser, I argue, move to the opposite extreme from AAO in their disengagement from broader social or political relevance."

So Wnadelweiser disengages completely from social commentary, then what kind of social relation emerges from their works.
For that is necessary to see what kind of social bonds emerge from 4:33". Both the performer and the listener are capable of sound making, both are creators in the context of 4:33". That is the exchange that occurs with Wnadelweiser music.

In 4 0 33 00 , the
dynamic between performer and audience, for example, rather than being destroyed,
is underlined as a component of the work. An audience member coughs. Looking
around, she realizes that the cough, along with her physical and emotional responses,
her body language, all become ‘part of the work’. The performer then assumes the
passive role of listening to the audience member; the two acknowledge the ostensible
‘equality’ of the consequences of their actions (they both make sounds), which
overlays their ordinary hierarchical roles as performer and listener. An exchange
occurs. The interplay multiplies across the rest of the audience as they take notice.

More than simply political in the content of individual works, Ultra-red engage the
relationship between the aesthetic and the political; art challenges and shapes social
action. Their work has been referred to as ‘‘‘music performance’’’ (Thaemlitz, 2010,
p. 84) and is elsewhere classified as sound art. 16 Why not, however, hear this work as
music proper—more precisely, as critical music?


Inside/outside relationship is relevant to understand groups, which according to Latoru can onyl be defineded int erms of exclution.

Can silence pose a relationship that goes beyond the inside/outisde binary?

Can silence show new modes of relations and new ways of connecting?

"Would the future of Wandelweiser require an
‘official’ manifesto or mission statement; or, ignoring the group’s supposed
‘requirement to talk’, would Wandelweiser’s implicit discursive boundaries shrink
back into invisibility, revealing a network of silence extending out into infinity? If
premised on lending an ear to that which falls outside its (un)silent borders, perhaps
only then might the silent network be rightfully respelled as the listen network."






















































































































