Reading: Treaty on nomadology - A Thousand Plateaus

Author: Gilles Deleuze & Felix Guattari

Units: 2, Zone:theory

Bibliography:Deleuze, Gilles & Guattari, Félix. 1993. 'Treaty on nomadology' in A Thousand Plateaus. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Links:


Notes:



The war machine is an observation of the state and capitalism from the outside.

Bret Adkins asses that it is one of the first concepts that DnG started to work on after writing the antioedipus.

Nomadology is the outside of the State (apparatus of capture is the outside of capitalism).

The war-machine (the state) is the observation of a tendency of assemblages.

Assemblages combine tendencies in particular ratios. Not clear distinctions or binary oppositons.

Anti-Oedipus, where Deleuze and Guattari argue that while state forms operate on the  discontinuous  relation  between  alliance  and  filiation,  capital-ism  collapses  alliance  and  filiation  and  functions  according  to  an  axiomatic.


AXIOM I. The war machine is exterior to the State apparatus.

PROPOSITION I. This exteriority is first attested to in mythology, epic,
drama, and games.

War is the domain outside the two headed sovereign: magician-king/ jurist-rpiest. (executive and legislative powers on liberal politics?)

Internal relations determine chess (where the game is static and the figures coded) while external relations determine go.

Indra is exterior to Mitra-Varuna. He  is  the  breaker  of  walls.  He  makes  striated  space  smooth.  He  is  the  betrayer  and  mischief-maker.  He’s  playing  a  different  game  from Mitra and Varuna.

War-machines make striated spaces smooth.

“It  is  not  enough  to  affirm  that  the  war  machine  is  external  to  the  apparatus.  It  is  necessary  to  reach  the  point of conceiving the war machine as itself a pure form of exteriority, whereas the State apparatus constitutes the form of interiority we habitually take as a model, or according to which we are in the habit of thinking” (TP 354).

Because thought has been colonised by the logic of interiority thinking purely about and through exteriority is remarkably difficult.

So, there is nothing outside the state. This mirrors the thought that there is nothing outside of thought.

Here we are discussing the origins (originality) of war.

"It is in terms not of independence, but of coexistence and competition in a perpetual field of interaction, that we must conceive of interiority and exteriority, war machines of metamorphosis and State apparatuses of identity ... The same field circumscribes its interiority in States, but describes its exteriority in what escapes States or stands against States. (TP 360–1)"


There are two kind of mahcines of this type. The machines that tend to totalise like christianity or capitalism and the ones that we are fereing to in this millieu. Local bands and groups of people that keep confirming their existence against the organs of the state. Such exteriorities are beyond ideological understanding: nazism and anarchism are groups of externalities that have been casts out of state relations.

""Deleuze  and Guattari’s understanding of the history of science parallels their understandings  of  art  and  philosophy  in  that  in  each  case  they’re  looking  for  alternate  lines  of  development,  lines  not  explored  in  the dominant tradition.""


War machines like art, philosophy or science explore alternate lines of development, the ones discarded or ignored by hegemonic traditions.

Eccentric science are the sciences that are not in service of the State.

The materiality fo nomad sciences and a nomadic understanding of reality has to do with flows. Fluids rathert than solids.
Whereas royal sciences seek purity and stability nomadic sciences embrace the messines.

The nomadic science depends in a topographical and smooth space in which transformation and deformation can happen. A space in which a building can transform into a donut. The striated space of royal sciences is geometrical and things never actually touch.


Forget trascendendant forms, forget about a euclidean geometry that sort of imitates in its discrete multiple forms a perfect idealised geometry. "Rather, each figure is an event, a set of transformations or affections. The task of nomad science is not to identify the discrete figure,  but  map  out  its  ways  of  affecting  and  being  affected."

Affection is the motor of transformation.

Science has both tendencies towards nomadic and royal practices. And both tendencies need each other.

PROBLEM I. Is there a way of warding off the formation of a State apparatus (or its equivalents in a group)?

So can a State be avoided? The answer relates to this ^. No, the State needs nomadic practices in order to capture and differentiate them from life. 

But such problem here is not to be solved but to understand the limits of thought. 

The state can be think of as limits that regulate thought itself. 


War is against the State.


"We certainly would not say that discipline is what
defines a war machine: discipline is the characteristic required of armies
after the State has appropriated them. The war machine answers to other
rules. We are not saying that they are better, of course, only that they
animate a fundamental indiscipline of the warrior, a questioning of
hierarchy, perpetual blackmail by abandonment or betrayal, and a very
volatile sense of honor, all of which, once again, impedes the formation
of the State."

The state has always been in touch with exteriorities.

The relationship between war machines and States has to be understood as the original entity. Neither the state nor the war-machine.

The law of the state is the law of internal-external. Not the all or nothing.

State is sovereign but can only reign over what can be internalised.

"The outside appears simultaneously in two
directions: huge worldwide machines branched out over the entire
ecumenon at a given moment, which enjoy a large measure of autonomy in
relation to the States (for example, commercial organization of the "multi-
national" type, or industrial complexes, or even religious formations like
Christianity, Islam, certain prophetic or messianic movements, etc.); but
also the local mechanisms of bands, margins, minorities, which continue
to affirm the rights of segmentary societies in opposition to the organs of
State power."

War machines can only be captured by States in as econd order. War machiens are not actually autonomous but are always in relationship with the State:

"It is in terms not of indepen-
dence, but of coexistence and competition in a perpetual field of interac-
tion, that we must conceive of exteriority and interiority, war machines of
metamorphosis and State apparatuses of identity, bands and kingdoms,
megamachines and empires. The same field circumscribes its interiority in
States, but describes its exteriority in what escapes States or stands against
States."

P ROPOSITION III. The exteriority of the war ma chine is also attested to by
epistemology, which intimates the existence and perpetuation of a
"nomad"or "minor science."

These are the twin heads formalized in the two questions that cannot be asked without reference to one another: 1) What is think-ing? 2) Who thinks? Deleuze  and  Guattari  are  quick  to  point  out  that  the  relation  between thought and the state-form “is not simply a metaphor ... It is the necessary condition for the constitution of thought as a principle, or as a form of interiority, as a stratum” (TP 375). The parallels  between  the  two  arise  as  a  function  of  stratification  itself. 

Stratification allows to explain the internilised logic of the magician-king and the priest-jurist. It is not a metaphor but such dynamic happens recursively in many strata.

This is expressed in though-formation as content and expression.What is thinking and who thinks.

Thought is formed as a State, as our thinking patterns emulate thought we tend to legitimise the State as natural since it corresponds formally with our thoughts.


""For Kant reason is a tribunal that dispenses determining judgments that  keep  concepts  within  their  appointed  boundaries.  For  Kleist  reason is a workshop that creates ideas under the pressure of having to  speak.""


AXIOM II. The war machine is the invention of the nomads (insofar as it is exterior to the State apparatus and distinct from the military institution). As such, the war machine has three aspects, a spatiogeographic aspect, an arithmetic or algebraic aspect, and an affective aspect.

PROPOSITION V. Nomad existence necessarily effectuates the conditions of the war machine in space.


A difference between an migrant and a nomadic assemblage:

""A nomadic assemblage affects and is affected through the weapons of a war machine. A migratory assemblage is not. Or, to put the matter starkly,  “the  nomad  reterritorializes  on  deterritorialization  itself”""  

An migrant moves from space a to b. From the motherland to another land. The nomad follows a trajectory that has many points that non is a final destination.

So. nomads do not move:
""How can they claim that nomads don’t move, when move-ment seems to be their defining characteristic? In order to answer this question Deleuze and Guattari distinguish between speed and movement.  “Movement  is  extensive;  speed  is  intensive” ""


Movement is extensive, speed is intensive.

Movement requires a measurable quantifiable striated space, speed is onyl intensive so it operates only in a smooth space. Where there are no codes.
Nomads are composed by speed and slowness but not by movement.

Migrants deterritorialise but reterritorialise again.

Territory can also arise from sound, from rhythm.

The nomad produces an absolute deterritorialisation but the migrant can only deterritorialise relatively. 

Nomads follow a line of flight a trajectory of absolute deterritorialisation!!!!!*******

The function of the State is to regulate, to code space. To produce striation. The state is striated in order to produce movement and regulate flows that otherwise might be trajectories. The state utilises the smooth space in the service of the striated one.

"Whereas the migrant leaves behind a milieu that has become
amorphous or hostile, the nomad is one who does not depart, does not want
to depart, who clings to the smooth space left by the receding forest, where
the steppe or the desert advances, and who invents nomadism as a response
to this challenge."

"speed, on the contrary, constitutes the absolute
character of a body whose irreducible parts (atoms) occupy or fill a smooth
space in the manner of a vortex, with the possibility of springing up at any
point."


Nomads move absolutely (line of flights with absolute deterritorialisation potency) and they move as in a vortex. With no direction and to any diraction at the same time.

War amchines move in vortexes, swirling...

The nomad reterritorialises on deterritorialisation itself. ******** Decoding of the land is relevant here.

Smooth space resonates, can be udnerstood through sound:

"The same terms are used to describe ice deserts
as sand deserts: there is no line separating earth and sky; there is no inter-
mediate distance, no perspective or contour; visibility is limited; and yet
there is an extraordinarily fine topology that relies not on points or objects
but rather on haecceities, on sets of relations (winds, undulations of snow
or sand, the song of the sand or the creaking of ice, the tactile qualities of
both). It is a tactile space, or rather "haptic," a sonorous much more than a
visual space. 56 The variability, the polyvocality of directions, is an essential
feature of smooth spaces of the rhizome type, and it alters their cartogra-
phy."



"One of the fundamental tasks of the State is to striate the space over
which it reigns, or to utilize smooth spaces as a means of communication in
the service of striated space."

This is key to understand revolution:

"Speed and absolute movement are not without their laws, but they are the laws of the nomos, of the smooth space
that deploys it, of the war machine that populates it. If the nomads formed
the war machine, it was by inventing absolute speed, by being "synony-
mous" with speed. And each time there is an operation against the State—
insubordination, rioting, guerrilla warfare, or revolution as act—it can be
said that a war machine has revived, that a new nomadic potential has
appeared, accompanied by the reconstitution of a smooth space or a man-
ner of being in space as though it were smooth (Virilio discusses the impor-
tance of the riot or revolutionary theme of "holding the street"). It is in this
sense that the response of the State against all that threatens to move
beyond it is to striate space."

So we can understand counterevolution as a re-striating of space at the same time that we can undersatnd revolution as a smoothening of the space.


PROPOSITION VI. Nomad existence necessarily implies the numerical
elements of a war machine.

Explanation of proposition VI:
Once again the issue here is two ways of occupying space. The  state  occupies  space  by  striating  it.  That  is,  it  closes  space  off  and  distributes  it  as  property.  In  this  respect  space  is  numbered,  organized  geometrically,  and  only  then  can  people  (or  things)  occupy  it.  The  chessboard  provides  the  perfect  image  here.  Not  only does it represent war, but it represents a very particular kind of war, a war between two states on a grid of stratified space. The grid has  a  horizontal  and  vertical  organization  that  allows  each  square  to  be  uniquely  identified.  Each  square  becomes  a  property  to  be  controlled.  

Smooth  space  “is  occupied  without  being  counted” (TP 389). Numbering number thus refers to “autonomous arithmetic organization” independent of space, whereas numbered number makes arithmetic organization dependent on space.

The key distinction in this regard is whether numeri-cal organization is autonomous (the numbering number) or subor-dinated to the state apparatus (the numbered number).

-------------------

PROPOSITION IX. War does not necessarily have the battle as its object,
and more important, the war machine does not necessarily have war as
its object, although war and the battle may be its necessary result
(under certain conditions)


We now come to three successive problems. 
First, is the battle the "object" of war? 
War in a formal sense has as object the battle but guerrilla is the form of war that avoids battles.

"we can say is that the battle and the nonbattle are the double object of war,
according to a criterion that does not coincide with the offensive and the
defensive, or even with war proper and guerrilla warfare"


But also, is war the "object" of the war machine? 

War has as an objective the anihilation of the enemy. So, no. War amchine does not have as an end war itself.

Nomads tend to occupy smooth spaces. that is their object.

"If war necessarily results, it
is because the war machine collides with States and cities, as forces (of
stri-ation) opposing its positive object: from then on, the war machine has as
its enemy the State, the city, the state and urban phenomenon, and adopts
as its objective their annihilation."

War i neither the condition or the object of a war machine but it is often a necessity that comes with nomadic movement.

Derrida wold say that war is the supplement of a war machine.



And finally, to what extent is the war machine the "object" of the State appara-
tus?

War is not the object of the State apparatus. To the contrary. It is to suppress war. Not that war is somehow a "natural state" like it would be claimed by Hobbes.

"One of the biggest questions from the point of view of universal
history is: How will the State appropriate the war machine, that is, consti-
tute one for itself, in conformity with its size, its domination, and its aims?"


Summary of this proposition:
(1) The war machine is that nomad invention that in fact has war not as its primary
object but as its second-order, supplementary or synthetic objective, in the
sense that it is determined in such a way as to destroy the State-form and
city-form with which it collides. (2) When the State appropriates the war
machine, the latter obviously changes in nature and function, since it is
afterward directed against the nomad and all State destroyers, or else
expresses relations between States, to the extent that a State undertakes
exclusively to destroy another State or impose its aims upon it. (3) It is pre-
cisely after the war machine has been appropriated by the State in this way
that it tends to take war for its direct and primary object, for its "analytic"
object (and that war tends to take the battle for its object). In short, it is at
one and the same time that the State apparatus appropriates a war
machine, that the war machine takes war as its object, and that war be-
comes subordinated to the aims of the State.
**********************************

Turning the war machine back against the nomads may constitute for the State a
danger as great as that presented by nomads directing the war machine
against States.
^^^ when the war machine is redirected towards the nomads the risk is that it needs a State apparatus itself. Thus the State that now has to compete or is menaced by the vision of the State that emerges from the war machine used against the nomads.

THIS:
The question is therefore less the realization of war than the appropria-
tion of the war machine. It is at the same time that the State apparatus
appropriates the war machine, subordinates it to its "political" aims, and
gives it war as its direct object

THIS:
they can make war only on the condition that they simultaneously create something else

THIS:::::
War machines take shape against the apparatuses that
appropriate the machine and make war their affair and their object: they
bring connections to bear against the great conjunction of the apparatuses
of capture or domination.


-----------------------

The state limits the war machine by appropriating it. Apparatuses of capture of the state: Territoriality, work and tax.

For D and G war is equivalent to the war machine.

Real wars (sup-plementarily)  arise  first  in  the  conflict  between  nomads  and  the  state, but once the war machine has been captured by the state, the state uses the war machine (now subordinated to its political aims through  a  hierarchical  military  apparatus)  to  engage  in  war  as  a  necessary,  analytic  object. 

War:
Arises from the conflict between the nomads and the state.
The state captures the war machine. (subrdinates it to its political aims through the constitution of a military apparatus)
Once captured, the State uses the war machine to engage in war as a necessary and analytic object.

Todal war and capitalism and deeply connected. War becomes an important part of the economy that needs investment.

At first capitalism seems to be subordinated to the state but this is quickly surpassed by the reality. The it is not clear if the State functions only to produce war. Or is it the war that produces the State. As a State approaches to a state of total war the State in itself functions and adopt war as a model.


The State becomes War.

Total war engenders states that can be understood as war-machines.

Two figures emerge from this: Fascism (which will be better understood in micropolitics an segmentaerity) and the second is a worldwide war machine State (Global capitlaism).

“total  war  itself  is  surpassed,  toward  a  form  of  peace  more  terrifying  still”  (TP  421)


Politics becomes the continuation of war by other means. Reversed from: War is the continuation of politicos by other means.


The two poles refered to by D n G are that of a state of total war or a war-machine that meets war to deterritorialise striated spaces in order to produce more smooth ones. A war machine opens straited spaces to smooth ones. A community in the internet, an artistic movement, a political vanguard; these are all nomads that go beyond what is possible under State logic and by making new connections recode and uncode what is possible or not. Caution is adviced to put much faith in nomads since their ideological position does not guarantee that the pole that leads towards fascism and global capitalism won' t be the dominating tendency.

The idea is always to keep moving and avoid the capture of the war machine. The idea is constant experimentation.


































































































